You're wondering when the Federal
Reserve is going to lower rates. Are
they going to keep rates the same? Are
they going to raise rates? Is employment
going higher or lower? Is inflation
going higher and lower? And you just
watched the recent FOMC statement this
week and you're more confused than ever.
Don't worry, I'm going to help you read
between the lines because QE is coming
faster than most people expect. My name
is Joe Brown. I'm a former stock broker.
Now I run Heresy Financial where I help
active investors decrease portfolio
risk, increase long-term returns. If
that sounds like something you're
interested in getting help with, go
ahead and click on that link in the
description below after the video. One
of the ways that you can tell the
direction the Federal Reserve is headed
is by looking at the differences in
their statement from one meeting to the
next. And that's exactly what we're
going to do right now. All the text that
you see in black is text that is the
same or it is unchanged from the last
FOMC meeting until this one. If you see
text that has been crossed out, that is
a word or phrase that was in the last
statement but no longer appeared in the
current one. And then if you see text in
red that is not crossed out, that is
text that appears in the new statement
that did not appear in the last one. And
see right off the bat, the word recent
was replaced with although swings in net
exports have affected the data. Goes on
to say that recent indicators suggest
economic activity has continued to
expand at a solid pace. What is going on
here? They are referring to the recent
contraction in GDP, the shrinking
economy that was driven largely by the
trade deficit. Quarter 1 had a massive
surge in imports as everybody was trying
to frontr run tariffs. The Federal
Reserve acknowledges that swings in net
exports, in other words, a massive surge
in imports causing a huge spike in the
trade deficit has happened. Although
economic activity has continued to
expand at a solid pace. In other words,
they're completely discounting the fact
that GDP shrank because they're saying,
well, it was largely due to frontr
running those tariffs. And that means
that because you were front running the
tariffs, you're not going to be having
that same level of importing in the
following quarter because you've already
bought that stuff that you need. And so
imports are going to be offset next
quarter from all of that front running
it. We essentially did two quarters
worth of buying in the first quarter
over the course of two quarters or three
quarters maybe. That's going to net
itself out. So they're saying we're just
discounting that. The next change in the
statement comes in this sentence here.
Uncertainty around the economic outlook
has been replaced with uncertainty about
the economic outlook. And they also said
that it is increased further. These
changes are small and irrelevant.
Although the last sentence does matter.
The last sentence in this paragraph is
the committee is attentive to the risks
to both sides of its dual mandate. Then
it added this time and judges that the
risks of higher employment and higher
inflation have risen. Now, this is very
important because for the Federal
Reserve, employment and inflation are
opposing goals. If they want to boost
employment, the only tools that they
have in their bucket are different ways
to manipulate the money supply or to
manipulate using the money supply. If
they raise rates, they're trying to
convince people to save and not spend
and pay off their debt. If they lower
rates, they're trying to convince people
to borrow more and spend more and invest
more. When they increase the size of
their balance sheet, they're injecting a
bunch of cash into the system. again
trying to spur that economic activity.
When they reduce their balance sheet,
they're sucking liquidity out of the
financial system. Again, trying to do
the opposite. So, all of their tools are
there to manipulate the money supply.
When they increase the money supply,
that stimulates economic activity, which
pushes up employment, and it also pushes
up prices. When they shrink the money
supply, that restricts economic
activity, which pulls employment down,
and it pulls prices down. They are
saying we have risks on both sides of
the table here. It looks like the jobs
environment is getting worse. We have
risks for higher unemployment, but we
also have risks for higher prices. So,
they're saying, "Hey, we're kind of
stuck between a rock and a hard place
right now because if we ease, we're
going to push prices up, but if we
tighten, we're going to push
unemployment up." So, this is an
important change. We'll come back to
this later. Moving on, we can see
nothing changed as they were talking
about where they are keeping interest
rates, saying that they're going to be
carefully assessing incoming data. But
they did eliminate this whole sentence
here, which was basically their
explanation of the fact that they
decided to slow the pace of quantitative
tightening. This is the Federal
Reserve's balance sheet. This is where
the assets that they buy go in times of
QE. So like in 2020 when they bought a
bunch of treasuries and mortgage back
securities, they all went onto their
balance sheet. And then starting in
2022, they slowly started letting some
of that debt get paid off. And as that
debt gets paid off, their balance sheet
decreases in size. If we zoom in on just
the last year, we can see that over the
last month or so, the pace of this
decline has slowed, which is exactly
what they said they were going to do at
their last meeting. They always do these
transitions very slowly, unless there is
an absolute emergency. So over the last
couple of years, they've been sucking
liquidity out of the financial system
with quantitative tightening, letting
their balance sheet be reduced in size,
but they're slowly bringing that to a
close. So eventually here within the
next couple of months, their balance
sheet will not be changing at all. So
any debt that gets paid off, any of that
debt that they own that gets paid off,
they will just roll that straight back
over. So their balance sheet will stay
the exact same size. And then eventually
that tips back over into QE and their
balance sheet starts to head higher
again. But I'm getting ahead of myself
here. The rest of the statement has no
changes. Just saying that they are
prepared to change their monetary policy
stance if the data changes. And then we
have some changes at the end about who
voted. Now, why is it that I think that
we are going to see a reduction in rates
and a return to QE within the next two
quarters? Well, mainly it's because of
this right here. While the CPI still
shows inflation at elevated levels,
other arguably more accurate measures of
inflation currently show US inflation
much lower. Now this makes sense because
when you have economic contraction that
is associated with falling prices also
tariffs when you artificially as a
government make some things more
expensive some things that people were
already buying that means that if they
keep on buying those things and they
spend more on those things they have
less money available for everything
else. if they do decide to buy something
else instead. It's something that they
wouldn't have preferred to buy either
because the quality or the price. In
other words, overall tariffs are not
inflationary. They make some things more
expensive, but they don't push the broad
level of prices higher. In fact, because
they are a depressive force on economic
activity, they are actually deflationary
overall. This data will show up in the
official data at some point soon.
Whether it's in the next 3 months or 6
months, I don't know. But the Fed will
no longer be between that rock and that
hard place that we discussed earlier.
They won't be sitting there trying to
decide between making employment
conditions worse or making price
conditions worse. The price conditions
because of the depressed economic
activity, because of the recession,
because of the tariffs and the trade
war, prices will already be lower
anyway. They won't have to worry about
triggering more inflation because that
problem will have solved itself from the
recession. Which means they can focus on
just dealing with the recession and the
heightened unemployment by stimulating
the economy. In other words, within the
next couple of months, because of the
economic pain, the Federal Reserve will
allow themselves to return to QE and to
cut rates because they won't have to be
battling the inflation anymore. Over the
long term, this means that the long-term
debt cycle is still intact that I've
talked about many times on this channel.
During this phase of the long-term debt
cycle, we are seeing higher and higher
interest rates, higher and higher
inflation, while the government
deleverages itself relative to the size
of the economy. There are certain
periods of time within this long-term
debt cycle where interest rates and
prices come down, but these are
short-lived. It's actually probably what
we are seeing right now and will last
for maybe one or two more quarters. But
2020 marked the end of the last phase of
the long-term debt cycle. It marked the
end of lowering rates over time. It
marked the end of the government
levering up compared to the size of the
economy over time. It marked the end of
disinflation over time, which means
we're we're not going to see 0% rates
again. We're not going to see 2 and a
half% mortgages again. We might see a
brief reprieve here over the next couple
of months, but over the long term,
expect higher for longer. And if you'd
like help applying ideas like this to
your investing so you can protect
yourself during times of crisis and
overall grow your portfolio more
long-term, click on the link in the
description below. As always, thanks so
much for watching. Have a great day.