Despite what you may have heard, it is
not the Federal Reserve who actually
controls interest rates. There are two
main things the Federal Reserve controls
in order to enact its monetary policy.
And the first one is this, which is the
Federal Funds rate. And the second is
this, which is the Federal Reserve's
balance sheet. So despite all the
excitement or the hope that many people
are experiencing right now that mortgage
rates will be coming down soon, auto
loan rates will be coming down soon,
credit card rates will be coming down
soon or even US Treasury rates will be
coming down soon. The Federal Reserve
does not control these, which means by
the Fed lowering rates, it may not have
any impact or may not have as much
impact on your interest rates as you're
hoping for. Why is that, though? and
most importantly, what does influence
those interest rates the most? First,
let's look at what they actually do
control. Starting with this one, the
federal funds rate. This is what people
are talking about when they say the Fed
is raising or lowering interest rates.
You can see from about the 40s through
the 80s, the Fed was on average raising
rates. And then from 1980 through about
2020, the Federal Reserve was on average
lowering rates. If we zoom in just on
what has happened since 2022 when the
Feds started raising interest rates,
they then held them steady and then
since have lowered them slightly. The
effective federal funds rate right now
is 4.22%.
And this federal funds rate is a range
that they try and make sure the federal
funds rate stays between. This is not an
interest rate that matters for you and
I. This is the rate that banks get paid
on their cash when they lend to each
other in overnight markets. That's it.
has nothing to do with T- billills or
treasuries or auto loans or mortgages
even. And in order to make sure that
this rate stays in between the range
that they want it to, they will directly
intervene in this overnight market. And
if banks place the reserves with the Fed
themselves, the Fed will just pay that
interest rate to the banks by printing
it into existence themselves. We are
going to come back to this later because
it's important, but currently there's
about $3.2 $2 trillion in bank reserves
that banks are just holding at the Fed
and getting the Fed funds rate directly
from the Federal Reserve themselves. So,
this is a market that the Federal
Reserve just outright controls. But it
is not the only tool the Federal Reserve
uses for monetary policy and sometimes
it's not the most effective either. That
brings us to the second most powerful
tool the Fed uses, which is their
balance sheet. You can see currently the
Fed has a balance sheet worth about $6.5
trillion, significantly lower than where
it was when it peaked in 2022 at almost
$9 trillion. You can think of the Fed's
balance sheet like a brokerage account.
They create money out of thin air, use
that new money to buy assets from the
open market like US treasuries and
mortgage back securities and place those
assets on their balance sheet. When that
accumulation is happening, in other
words, they are doing buying of assets.
Their balance sheet is growing. During
times like this, it is called
quantitative easing. Now, quantitative
easing is a very important way to
describe what they are doing. So,
remember that because it's quantitative,
not qualitative. We're going to come
back to that in a moment. Now, the
opposite is true as well. When the
balance sheet is declining, they're
doing something called quantitative
tightening, which means assets are
leaving their balance sheet. This
happens from general bleed off when
assets get paid back but they do it in
an orderly fashion. So sometimes they do
have to roll over, sometimes they have
to buy more but overall the assets on
their balance sheet are declining. This
means cash is being extracted, liquidity
reserves being extracted from the
financial system since it goes back to
the Fed itself. That money just gets
destroyed. It ceases to exist. So QE add
cash take out assets. QT both the assets
and the cash cease to exist. Now, that's
important because it's not that these
assets are just getting sold back and
then into the market being traded around
between other people. This is debt
that's getting paid off. Dollars are
lent into existence, which means when
that debt gets paid off, both the asset
and the money ceases to exist. The
wonders of the fiat financial system.
Now, depending on the scale in which
they are doing quantitative easing or
tightening, this can have huge impacts
on the market, but again, it's not
directly controlling interest rates. For
example, if the Federal Reserve decides
to go out there and buy a hundred
billion dollars worth of treasuries over
the course of a couple of years, it's
not really going to move the markets at
all. Yes, it's a little extra buying
pressure, so prices of bonds will be a
little bit higher than they would be
otherwise, but not much. On the flip
side, though, when the Fed goes out and
buys $5 trillion worth of treasuries
from 2020 through 2022, that's going to
have a huge impact on the market, and
that's going to push interest rates
down. That's going to have a big impact
on lifting the prices of those bonds.
But keep in mind here, this is called
quantitative easing because they're
making a decision based on how many
bonds to buy or sell, how much liquidity
to inject or extract from the market.
They are not saying we want interest
rates for this specific bond to be
exactly here and so we will buy or sell
whatever is necessary to make that
happen. They're just saying, "Hey, we're
going to buy a trillion dollars worth of
treasuries or a billion dollars worth of
treasuries or sell a hundred billion
worth of treasuries and the rest of the
market forces are also going to be at
play and will determine what the
interest rate or the yield ends up
being." Now, if you notice this chart,
the Federal Reserve has been doing
quantitative tightening for a couple of
years now. Their balance sheet has been
declining, which has been sucking
liquidity out of the financial system.
Over that time period, on average,
interest rates have risen. But recently,
rates have been falling. even the
10-year Treasury yield is much lower
than where it was a couple of months
ago. This despite the fact that their
balance sheet is still declining over
that period of time. So, if they're
extracting liquidity, how is it that
rates are falling? Especially because we
just went over the fact that them
cutting interest rates is only cutting
interest rates for what banks get paid
on their overnight reserves. Well,
there's two things at play here. One of
them is front running, and the other one
is what's known as the crowding out
effect. To understand this first, let's
take a look at this chart which is
called the reverse repo facility at the
Federal Reserve. Now, the reverse repo
facility is where banks can give extra
cash to the Federal Reserve in exchange
for collateral that they need and they
get paid a nice little interest rate on
it while the cash sits there. If that
sounds similar to bank reserves getting
paid an overnight reserve balance at the
Fed, you're right, it does. But after
all the money printing that took place
in 2020 and 2021, banks needed a place
to park the cash and get the collateral
they needed. And that all flooded into
the reverse repo facility because the
Federal Reserve was paying a risk-free
interest rate of 5% to banks just to
hold all this cash with the Fed. This
meant that all of that cash was
literally parked, hidden, taken,
shielded, held on to by the Federal
Reserve on purpose because the Fed
didn't want all of that cash being
flooded out into the marketplace. The
Fed was trying to raise interest rates.
The Fed is trying to tighten. The Fed
was trying to make sure inflation didn't
get out of control. So, they were
telling banks, "Hey, don't go lend this
out to people for cheap. Keep it here
and we will reward you for making sure
nobody else can get access to this
money. Sounds a little twisted. It is.
Welcome to the world of the fiat
financial system. This is what's known
as the crowding out effect. Usually we
talk about it from the standpoint of
like treasuries, but it stands in this
case as well. If the Federal Reserve can
print money into existence and they're
saying risk-free, we'll give you 5% on
your money, then financial institutions
are going to do a lot of that. They're
not going to put that money out in the
marketplace for, you know, 6% or 7% and
take on a ton of extra risk. And they're
definitely got not going to take on
extra risk to loan that money out to
somebody else for less than 5%. But the
opposite of this is also true. When the
Fed does start to lower interest rates,
that means that you no longer have
access to that really high interest rate
on risk-free money anymore. So, you got
to take that and you got to deploy it
elsewhere. When you push this to its
extreme, let's say you can't get
anything over a half a percent from the
Federal Reserve, all of the cash leaves
that and goes out to find somewhere else
to deploy it. Which means now you have a
lot of lenders competing for borrowers,
which pushes interest rates across the
curve down. And that's part of the
reason why we've seen long-term interest
rates start to fall recently because of
frontr running this with financial
institutions largely anticipating the
Federal Reserve lowering interest rates
over the next year or so. Big money
wants to get in front of that and lock
in some of the high rates. Now, for
example, right now you can get tea bills
for over 4% when you're looking at 4
weeks or 6 weeks, but go out to like a
year and you're looking at like 3 and
12%. You might think, well, why wouldn't
you just put it in a four-week or a 6
week T bill and just continue to roll it
over? It's because the market expects
that by the time you get to a half a
year from now or a full year from now,
the Fed will have lowered interest
rates. And so big money is willing to
lock up their funds for a longer period
of time right now, which puts a bid on
Treasury prices, which pushes yields
lower because they're willing to lock
their money up for a lower interest rate
right now with the anticipation that
over the course of that entire lifetime
of that bond that that will actually end
up being a higher yield for them than if
they took the short-term bonds and just
had to completely continually roll them
over. If that doesn't make sense, let's
say you could get 10% in the first year,
but 1% every year after that for like 50
years. Or you could get 5% every single
year, lock that in for 50 years.
Clearly, it would be better to get 5%
every year, lock that in for 50 years,
than to get a higher rate in the
beginning, and then a much lower rate
for the rest of the term. That's what's
going on here. But we have another big
problem at play, and that is a $38
trillion elephant in the room. interest
costs alone above a trillion dollars per
year. The deficit spiraling out of
control as they borrow more and more
every year just to cover the regular
expenses. No spending is off limits.
Nothing is getting cut. Everything is
getting increased. They have to borrow
more and more every year just to keep
the current debt pile, let alone
borrowing more and more every year to
finance all of the additional spending.
This is why the Federal Reserve will
have to start doing QE again because the
market will need somebody else to come
in and be the buyer of these bonds. The
reason why the market will need this is
because as the US government borrows and
spends, that is new money coming into
existence. That is how debt works in a
fiat financial system. When you go and
borrow money, you are not transferring
dollars from one bank account to another
bank account. Dollars are lent into
existence. So when you have a government
that is spending $2 trillion every year,
more than they are taking in taxes, that
means there's $2 trillion a year of new
money that didn't exist before that is
being added to the money supply. This
bids up the prices of goods and
services. And within a short period of
time, I think this will become clear to
the market that inflation will be taking
back off again as a result of this
government spending that cannot do
anything but spiral further out of
control. And buyers are not going to
want to hold on to treasuries at 3 to 4%
anymore. They'll only be willing to lend
to the government if they can get a
higher rate of return, something that at
least compensates them for the inflation
that is expected during that time
period. Now, the reason why I think this
is going to happen is because this is
exactly what happened last time the US
hit 120% debt to GDP ratio. At the peak
from World War II, the United States
government's debt had reached 120% of
the value of GDP. and we are there
again. This makes it very difficult to
get the spending back under control
unless the Federal Reserve comes in to
your rescue. And that's exactly what
they did from 1942 through 1951.
Something called yield curve control.
Now, this is fundamentally different
than quantitative easing. I described to
you earlier why it's called quantitative
easing. It's because the Fed just
decides, hey, we're going to be buying a
hundred billion worth of treasuries or
$200 billion worth of treasuries, and
whatever the price or the yield of the
rate ends up being, we're fine with
that. we're buying a specific quantity.
With yield curve control, the Fed goes
out there and says, "We want the 2-year
Treasury to be exactly 3% or we want the
10-year Treasury to be exactly 4% or 3%
or 2%, whatever it is." You get the
point. They say, "We are going to peg a
specific interest rate, a specific yield
across the curve, which means that no
matter how much we have to buy or sell,
we will do that." and they then use
their balance sheet to control all
government yields just like they control
the federal funds rate. Remember with
the federal funds rate, this is the rate
that banks pay each other when borrowing
and lending reserve balances to each
other overnight. And in order to make
sure it stays there, they themselves pay
an interest rate on those reserve
balances that banks hold at the Fed. So,
they outright control this. And with
yield curve control, they then outright
control the rest of the curve. Now, the
10-year Treasury yield is important
because most interest rates look at the
10-year Treasury yield as the benchmark.
Most people don't hold on to mortgages
for 30 years. Most mortgages get paid
off early from the home being sold. Many
auto loans are getting up there from 6
to 7 to 8 years now. Business loans as
well are near 10. And so the 10-year
Treasury yield serves as a good
benchmark for the risk-free rate. Which
means if I can give my money to the
government for 10 years for 3 12%, but I
can loan my money to you for the same
time period for 7 or 8 or 9%. Then I
just look at the risk and think, okay,
well, if the risk is worth it, then
sure, I will do that. But I'm definitely
not going to loan my money to you for
only 3% because I can just give it to
the government instead. And they have a
monopoly on violence to ensure that I
will get my interest in principle back.
whereas you and the free market do not.
Which means that even if the Federal
Reserve steps in with yield curve
control and we see government treasury
yields plummet as a result because the
Fed just goes on a buying spree and they
buy any and all treasuries necessary in
order to make sure the government has
the low interest rates that they need to
support their spending. It does not
necessarily mean it will translate over
to mortgages, over to auto loans, credit
cards, or other forms of debt. Because
if the government is doing that, the
expansion of the money supply will only
be that much faster. which means
inflation will only be that much higher.
And so as long as there's some free
market influence on mortgage rates or on
auto loans, then we could actually see
an inverse correlation where the more
the Federal Reserve tries to control
interest rates for the US government,
the more the opposite will happen for
interest rates for everybody else. Now,
it's always possible that the federal
government comes in and they say, "Okay,
interest rates for mortgages cannot
exceed this. Interest rates for credit
cards cannot exceed this. That is always
possible, especially with the command
and control economy that we live in
today. Being surprised basically every
week now with new news articles and
stories about what the government is
doing in order to try and control the
economy instead of just letting the free
market do what it does best, which is
create prosperity and abundance for
everybody. The power-hungry
interventionists will always find ways
to intervene because they think they
know better than you do. In summary, the
Federal Reserve controls the shortest
end right now and that has some
influence on other interest rates. But
the more that they exert control over
government interest rates through buying
up treasuries, through QE or yield curve
control means that in all likelihood
other interest rates will go up unless
they start to intervene there as well.
As always, thank you so much for
watching. Have a great day.