You're probably familiar with the
Federal Reserve's dual mandate that has
been given to them by Congress, which is
to promote maximum employment and price
stability. But what most people don't
know is that the Federal Reserve
actually has a secret third mandate. And
that is to promote moderate long-term
interest rates. And this third mandate
actually supersedes the first two
because it supports the real reason
behind the Federal Reserve's entire
existence. And knowing how this works
will help you position your portfolio to
be able to profit off of the coming
chaos because you know in advance how
they're going to deal with it. I'm Joe
Brown. I'm a former stock broker and I
run Heresy Financial where I teach
active investors how to decrease
portfolio risk and increase long-term
returns. Now, we've got to take a bit of
a trip back in time to the creation of
the Federal Reserve because their job
today is not exactly what it was when
they were started. The Federal Reserve
was established in 1913 and its
directive by Congress was to furnish an
elastic currency to afford means of
redisounting commercial paper and to
establish a more effective supervision
of banking in the United States. Now,
obviously they did a bangup job of that
because within 7 years of the Federal
Reserve's creation, we had the first
Great Depression in 1920 and then 9
years later we had an even bigger
depression that we now call the Great
Depression. starting in 1929. So, I'm
really glad we got the Federal Reserve
in there to manage bank risk. But in
1946, Congress passed the Employment Act
of 1946, which declared that government
policy was to promote maximum
employment, production, and purchasing
power. Moving forward to the 70s,
inflation had gotten out of control from
abandoning the gold standard. And so,
the 1977 Reform Act to the Federal
Reserve was passed. And here's where
they were given their triple mandate to
achieve maximum employment, stable
prices, and moderate long-term interest
rates. So, let's go through these one by
one, starting with maximum employment.
Why in the world would an entity like
the Fed that is essentially just a bank
for the rest of the banks be charged
with maximum employment of the entire
nation? Well, the reason is because
number one, they can affect employment
with monetary policy through
manipulation of money, both interest
rates and the supply. And this is
particularly insidious that the
government charged the Fed with this
because it is entirely selferving to the
government and not to the people of the
United States. You see, employment
should be a means to an end, and that
end should be wealth. But the government
treats jobs as an end in and of itself.
Nobody wants a job for the job's own
sake. You want a job because of what you
are getting from the job, which is
usually money, sometimes skills, but
ultimately you have a destination in
mind. So why would the government treat
jobs as an end themselves making an
agency who manipulates money focus on
making sure there's as many people as
possible with jobs? It's because that is
the source of the government's income.
Over half of the United States
government's total tax revenue comes
from individual income taxes, and 37%
comes from social security and Medicare
taxes, which are also individual
employment taxes, which means
88% of the United States government's
income comes as a result of taxing
people who have jobs. And so if you can
tell the currency manipulator to
manipulate the currency in a way that
makes sure that as many people as
possible have to have jobs for as long
as possible, you're going to do it
because that's where you get 88% of your
taxes from. Maximum employment is not
for our benefit. It's so they have a
constant tax base of people to steal
their purchasing power away from for
their entire lives. They do not want you
to retire. They do not want you to get
financially educated. They do not want
you to know how to invest. They do not
want you to know how to stay out of
debt. They want you locked in permanent
employment forever so they can tax you
forever. But what about stable prices?
I'm sure they have benevolent reasons
for wanting stable prices, right? Well,
in reality, prices should go down over
time. And historically, that's what
prices did for all of human history
except for brief periods of time. When
you have money dilution, you have
deflation over time. A great example of
this is the period of time from 1870
through 1910. You had deflation. In
other words, prices naturally went down
over time and people thrived financially
because even though prices were going
down and even though wages were going
down, real wealth and real wages kept on
going up. In other words, everybody was
getting a lot more for less. the cost of
acquiring goods and services, in other
words, wealth, went down so fast that
everybody kept on getting wealthier and
wealthier even though the nominal amount
of wealth might have been going down. If
that's confusing, imagine you have a
salary of $100,000 this year and next
year your salary goes down to $90,000.
But also imagine during that time the
house that you were looking at buying
went from $500,000 to $200,000. The car
you were looking at buying went from
$50,000 to
$15,000. That food, that restaurant that
you liked eating at used to cost you
$100 for a meal. Now it cost you $40 for
a meal. If your cost of living drops
significantly, you don't actually care
if your income drops a little bit
because your money goes so much farther
than it did before. That's how things
worked for all of human history. Because
the money supply was so constant and was
so anchored to reality because you had
to mine gold to get more money that as
the total pile of wealth grew and there
were more goods and services, you had
less money chasing more stuff. That's
deflation. It's the opposite of what we
have today, which is where the money
supply grows faster than the pile of
goods and services. So you have more
money chasing less goods, less stuff.
And in fact, in the 1977 reform act, the
government specifically stated that they
wanted the Federal Reserve to maintain a
long run growth of the monetary and
credit aggregates commensurate with the
economy's long run potential to increase
production. In other words, they didn't
want the real stuff, the real wealth,
the goods and services to grow at a
faster pace than the money supply. They
wanted to make sure the printing always
exceeded that. So the question is why?
Well, this is a chart of real interest
rates. Real interest rates are
calculated by adjusting whatever the
interest rate is for whatever the
inflation rate is at the time. And you
can see that often real interest rates
are actually negative. And by the way,
this is treasury yield. So this is what
the government is able to borrow at.
They want inflation so that they can
borrow at negative real interest rates.
If I borrow at 1% but inflation's at 2%,
then my real cost of borrowing is
negative 1%. In other words, I'm getting
paid to borrow because I am borrowing
money that is worth more than the money
I'm paying back to you in the future.
And the increased quantity of dollars
that I do have to pay back in the future
are not enough to make up for that fact.
Why would the government want negative
real interest rates? Well, because the
national debt continues to grow. It's
not enough that they force as many
people as possible into lifelong tax
slavery. They want to spend even more
than that and they don't want to
actually have to pay for that debt. So,
they want to borrow at negative interest
rates. Now, the fun thing here is that
all of this inflation has the added
bonus of keeping people employed for
longer because if you just save up wages
for 5 years, 10 years, eventually that
inflation is going to start eating away
rapidly at all your savings, which means
you have to work longer and harder just
to keep up with the inflation. And yeah,
you'll get a raise and a promotion here
and there, but it's rarely going to keep
up with or make up for the inflation
along the way. The persistence of
inflation also means that that money is
not usually going to be kept in savings
or out of productive work, even though
that's a fallacy. That means that people
have to deploy that money into
investments and into the economy in
order to try and get a return that
outpaces inflation, even if that means
taking on higher risk than they would
want to otherwise. This is politically
expedient. In other words, it's what the
politicians want because in the short
run, it feels better because there's
artificial booms and they don't care
that it might mean there's a bust at
some point in the future as a result of
the overinvestment. And now we get to
the third mandate, moderate long-term
interest rates. You might notice right
now that every single one of these is
very subjective and vague, left up to
interpretation. What does stable prices
mean? Oh, it means inflation. What does
maximum employment mean? Well, it's not
everybody. Are we going by the
unemployment rate? Are we going by the
job force? Are we going by job openings?
And what does moderate long-term
interest rates mean? What is moderate?
Is that 2%, is that 10%. They need to
leave these vague so that they can just
achieve their goals behind the scenes.
And nobody can look at them with any
strict form of measurement to say, "Hey,
you're not doing your job for us. You're
actually doing it for them." But the
reality is they need this mandate the
most because it is what supports the
other two. If inflation really starts to
take off, eventually lenders notice. If
you know there's a very high probability
that inflation is going to be running at
10% for the next couple of years, you
are not going to loan anybody money for
5%. You know you're going to be losing
on that. And so in order to compensate
yourself for that loss of purchasing
power, you're going to loan money out at
at least 10%. That will be the baseline.
But if the Federal Reserve has the power
given to them by Congress to make sure
long-term interest rates are what they
call moderate, it means they have the
ability to force interest rates back
down despite the fact that it pushes
them negative. Bottom line is that all
three mandates given to the Fed by
Congress are there to support an endless
stream of income for US government
spending. That's it. That's the real
reason the Federal Reserve exists. And
as long-term interest rates on US
government borrowing are inching higher
and higher, threatening to break out and
trigger global financial instability,
you can bet your bottom dollar that at
some point the line on this chart is
about to reverse course and probably
very soon. In other words, the Federal
Reserve is going to be forced to resume
quantitative easing again. It's in their
job description. interest rates go too
high, they have to buy those bonds to
push those rates back lower. This also
means that this bare market we are
currently experiencing is living on
borrowed time. It is a matter of when,
not if, we see a rapid recovery. When
the printing press turns back on, asset
prices go through the sky. Now, I know
you've probably been burned by trying to
buy the dip before only to lose more
money later on, but that's probably
because you didn't know how to number
one, identify what stocks you should be
buying, and number two, calculate what
price you should be buying them at. So,
this time, don't make that mistake. If
you don't know how to do that, I've
created a bare market investing guide
just for you, and it's only going to be
on a crazy sale while the bare market is
still here. Because by the time the bare
market's over and done with, it's going
to be too late. So, don't wait. Get it.
linked in the description below. As
always, thanks so much for watching.