your debt is about to get a lot more
expensive. This is a chart of the yield
on the 10-year US government Treasury
bond. And this is considered one of the
benchmarks for most interest rates
across the globe. The reason for this is
because if I borrow money, then there's
a chance I might default. I don't have
the ability to go put somebody in jail
if they don't pay me. So, there's a
chance you might not get your money back
from me. But with the US government,
unless they just choose to default, they
can always pay back their debt, which
means it is considered the risk-free
rate. Interest rates on other forms of
debt will look at the 10-year yield.
They'll start there and add on a premium
for the amount of risk that is being
taken on. Now, you might look at
something like the 30-year US Treasury
and wonder why that is not a more
accurate depiction of something like a
mortgage, which is also a 30-year loan.
And the reason is because actually most
mortgages don't last 30 years because
people move and they refinance. Those
loans tend to get paid off much closer
to 10 years after the loan is made
rather than 30 years. But the 10ear is
still just a benchmark, not an exact
science, just a starting point. But as
you can see from this chart, it looks
like it is headed higher. In fact, ever
since 2020, the interest rates on US
government borrowing have been getting
more and more expensive. Now, you'll
notice these lines that I have here.
I've got a trend line on the bottom,
which is a rising trend line. I've also
got a falling trend line shown on top.
You can see for the past couple of
years, the volatility in interest rates
has been decreasing. Or in other words,
we've seen price consolidation and that
energy has been squeezed, which usually
means a breakout is around the corner.
You see, all patterns on charts happen
as a result of mass behavior. A group of
people, all potential investors and
actual investors buying and selling and
coming up with a price. And that mass
psychology forms patterns because human
nature doesn't change. This rising trend
line at the bottom represents sellers of
US treasuries who are winning. And this
falling trend line at the top represents
buyers of treasuries who are winning.
And just in case you think I made a
mistake there, we are talking about
yields here. Bond prices and bond yields
are inversely correlated. So if you buy
up a bunch of bonds and you drive the
price of the bonds up, that means the
interest rates fall. The opposite is
true as well. If everybody sells a bunch
of bonds and the price of those bonds
collapses, the yields on those bonds
shoots through the roof. So, as the
lower trend line of interest rates go
up, that means bond sellers are winning.
And if we zoom in even closer, we see
price action that is even more
indicative of a breakout to the upside.
In other words, lenders to the US
government are demanding a higher and
higher interest rate on that debt, which
means lenders to people like you and me
will demand an even higher interest rate
than that. Now, the reason for this is
very simple. Now, if you're wondering
what kind of industries and investments
I'm looking out for in 2025, then sign
up for my free newsletter. It's called
Letters from a Heretic. In it, I cover
things like the five biggest threats to
your portfolio in 2025, my strategy for
managing the risk and the chaos while
still exposing yourself to the upside,
and the four hyper growth industries I'm
looking at right now. So, if you want to
know exactly what I think could tank the
market over the next 12 months, and the
types of opportunities that I think
could absolutely thrive, then sign up
for my free newsletter with the link in
the description below. I'll show you
everything I know. National debt stands
at $36 trillion. So far this year, they
have added over a trillion to that pile,
which is 23% more than they had added to
the debt pile the prior year. As a
result of this, just the interest on the
national debt alone is now the second
largest line item on the budget,
representing 14% of all spending. Add on
top of that the fact that the US
government is right now planning massive
tax cuts without any spending cuts,
which means they're just planning on
borrowing even more. Now, let me ask you
a question. If you were going to lend
money to somebody who had no savings, no
assets, let's say they make a h 100red
grand a year, and they have $2 million
of debt, and they decided that not only
were they going to cut their income in
half, but they were going to increase
their spending. Would you want to lend
this person more money? Probably not,
unless you were getting a very
attractive interest rate, which is why
lenders to the US government are
demanding higher and higher interest
rates on their debt over time. Now,
zooming out very far, we can see what
this trend actually looks like in
context. From 1940 through 1980,
interest rates rose the same way that
they are going to start doing now. This
is in stark contrast to the last phase
of the long-term debt cycle where
interest rates were falling for 40
years. We left that behind when interest
rates hit zero and the Fed printed $3
trillion, causing inflation to break out
again for the first time in decades. We
have entered a new phase of the
long-term debt cycle yet again that will
look very similar to 1940 through 1980
again. The pendulum basically finished
swinging one way and now it's swinging
back the other way like it has before.
If we zoom in on the 40 years from about
1940 through 1980, we can see that there
were periods of time where interest
rates fell. In fact, this happened quite
a bit. Especially when we look at the
70s, this happened. Every time the Fed
thought that they had beat inflation,
they'd lower interest rates. They would
throw fuel on that fire yet again, and
then they'd have to ratchet interest
rates up higher again after that. The
next couple of years to couple of
decades will look very similar to this
in my opinion. Now, the federal
government is hoping and planning that
we can grow our way out of this. It
seems to be that the idea is if we can
cut taxes enough, it doesn't matter what
we do with spending, there will be an
increase in the money supply. People
will have more money available to them
that they can spend. And that spending
will go to economic activity. It will go
to research. It will go to jobs. And the
economy will flourish enough so that
that debt load for the US government
doesn't matter as much. The economy will
be so big that they can easily tax their
way out of it afterwards. There are two
major flaws with this plan. Number one,
every dollar the US government spends is
still purchasing power. It is taking
away from the private economy. If they
spend that money by taking it through
taxes, they're just taking that as a
direct onetoone transfer. But if they
spend that money as a result of printing
it into existence, they're still taking
that purchasing power away from
everybody, but it's done through pushing
prices up. And so you're not actually
freeing up capital and freeing up
purchasing power to be used by the
productive economy. You're still
transferring it away. The second major
flaw with this is that one of the
biggest reasons why we are constrained
in terms of growth is because of
overregulation. We have a massive
government. We have thousands and
thousands of pages in the Federal
Register of laws and regulations that
make it difficult to impossible for
businesses to just grow, for people to
freely exchange with each other, for
competition to thrive, causing
innovation and lower prices. In other
words, more for less. If you actually
want to grow your way out of a debt
problem, yes, you need to reduce taxes,
but you also need to destroy spending
and you need to obliterate regulation.
The size of government is not determined
solely by the tax. We must also shrink
spending and regulation. And that does
not seem to be in the works right now,
at least yet. There was a brief period
of time after the election and before
the inauguration that I and many others
were actually hopeful that a new
administration could come in, learn what
they did wrong the first time and make
changes that would turn this ship
around, really shrink the government
both in taxes and in spending and also
shrink regulations. the past couple of
months have shown us anything, it is
that we are going to get something very
similar to his first term, which is
lower taxes, but it's also more
borrowing and spending and it's very
little deregulation. Now, the upside to
that is that if you know what's coming,
you can prepare and the main way you do
that is by buying assets because this is
going to be an environment that is going
to be very, very beneficial for asset
prices. And if you'd like my help
applying ideas like this to your own
investing so that you can grow your
portfolio and also have it protected
during market crashes like we just saw,
go ahead and click on the link in the
description below. As always, thank you
so much for watching. Have a great day.