Well guys, now that the one big
beautiful bill has passed, you can
expect the borrowing and spending
floodgates to open. And part of that is
because the Treasury General account
will need to be refilled from its
current levels of around 350 billion all
the way up to where it wants it to be
around 850 billion. This will drain bank
reserves. It will decrease liquidity in
the financial system and it will
probably force the Fed into measures to
increase liquidity like ending QT, maybe
even restarting QE, pushing interest
rates down and more. And all of those
have major implications for you and the
markets. And no, I have not been cloned
and replaced by an evil twin. I have a
mustache now. I'm traveling, which also
explains the temporary recording setup.
And I did not adequately account for the
differences in power outlets here. My
beard trimmer blew up on me in my hand.
My only option was to shave the entire
beard off, but I kept the mustache. Let
me know in the comments section below
whether I should keep the stash or not.
Okay, back to the Treasury General
Account. First of all, what is this
thing? This is essentially the
government's bank account. It is their
checking account. If you expand the
timeline here, you can see this account
was not really used until after the
financial crisis. And the reason for
that was prior to the financial crisis,
the government kept its money inside the
banking system. But because of the start
of debt monetization, which we call
quantitative easing, there's going to be
a lot more cash held inside the Treasury
general account or inside the
government's checking accounts. The Fed
didn't want that impacting things like
banks leverage ratios, collateral,
assets, and all that. And so they put
this Treasury general account off to the
side outside of the banking system. And
now it's just an account held at the
Federal Reserve. So it doesn't impact
the banking system whatsoever. Now over
the last 10 years, we've seen some wild
fluctuations. It used to hover around
the 2 to 400 billion mark. And then
after all the money printing that
happened in 2020, we saw the Treasury
General account spike up to about 1.8
trillion before it drained all the way
back down to only about 84 billion and
it's been volatile since then, but the
Treasury does like to keep it around the
7 to800 billion mark. Now, now you will
likely hear a lot of misinformation
about the Treasury General account,
primarily from people who do not
understand what it is. When they see the
number in the Treasury General account
going up and down, they usually say this
is quantitative tightening or this is
quantitative easing. It is nothing of
the sort. In fact, in general on net
over the long term, whatever happens in
this account is actually 100%
meaningless because the only way cash
can get into the Treasury general
account is through either taxing or
borrowing. And those dollars have to
come from somewhere. And so if the
Treasury's checking account is
increasing in size, that means somebody
else's checking account is decreasing in
size. This is not the Federal Reserve.
There is no printing that is happening
here. Similarly, when the Treasury
general account goes down, a lot of
people say it is QE or it is
stimulative. And that's because a bunch
of cash is leaving the government's
accounts and going into somebody else's
checking accounts. But we have to
remember how it got into the Treasury
General account in the first place,
which was from taxes or borrowing. And
so, the only way that money comes in and
out is by money going in and out.
There's no actual printing going on
specifically with the filling or the
draining of the Treasury general
account. So this specifically by itself
is not QT is not QE. It's just money
coming in from somewhere, money going
out to somewhere on net. There is no
creation or destruction of dollars in
the system. That being said, in the
short term, it absolutely can have an
effect on liquidity in the financial
system. Because if you imagine when this
thing starts to fill up really fast,
like I said earlier, those dollars are
coming from somewhere. And because tax
revenue is very predictable, they're not
just turning it on and off at will. The
way that they refill this account is
through extra borrowing. All that
borrowing has to take cash and liquidity
from somewhere. Now, if you take a look
at this Treasury presentation from
treasury.gov, gov, which is the fiscal
year 2025 quarter 2 report. We just have
to go down to the executive summary on
page 4 and we find right here the
projected end of quarter cash balances
are at 850 billion. The only reason they
are not there at this point is because
the Treasury has had to use the funds
that were in there to draw down on them
until the debt ceiling was raised. Now,
I mentioned at the beginning of the
video that the one big beautiful bill
has now passed, which means that that
debt ceiling has been raised. So, the
Treasury no longer has to rely on
drawing down the cash it has already
borrowed and taxed in order to fund
expenses. It can now borrow again and
refill that checking account back up.
Now, in theory, the Treasury could issue
whatever debt they wanted or any
duration. They could issue 30-year
bonds. They could issue one or two month
tea bills. The problem is liquidity is
already fairly strained in the financial
system right now and Trump has basically
said he doesn't want the Treasury to
issue anything but the shortest term
debt possible right now because interest
rates are still high. In a recent
interview, Trump stated that he was
going to refinance the $9 trillion that
is maturing over the next year as
short-term debt only because we have a
stupid person at the Federal Reserve. He
does not want to roll over that debt
that is maturing into longerterm debt
like two 10 20 or 30year treasuries
because then he's locking in that higher
interest debt. Remember within the next
9 to 12 months there's about 9 trillion
worth of debt that is maturing which
means the government has to pay it back.
They don't tax enough to pay their
expenses let alone to pay off $9
trillion worth of debt. The only way
they can pay that back is by borrowing
new debt. and they get to choose whether
they want to borrow one-year debt,
six-month debt, or 30-year debt. And
with 20-year yields right under 5%,
Trump does not want to lock in 5%
interest rates for the next 20 years and
would much rather roll it over at 4.3%
even though that's going to continually
be maturing and it'll have to continue
rolling it over and it will continue to
suck liquidity out of the system. and he
has said he's just going to continue
doing that until interest rates go down
far enough where he feels comfortable
refinancing it and rolling it over into
longerterm debt to lock in lower rates
for the long term. Now, so far the
Federal Reserve has resisted this
political pressure to lower rates for
Trump, but that will not last long. We
are about to see interest rates drop
over the next year, potentially by a
lot. We're also about to see things like
quantitative tightening stop and maybe
even quantitative easing restart. But
more on that in just a moment. You might
be wondering why short-term debt like
6-month T bills only has a yield of like
4.3% right now when so much of the debt
is getting rolled over there. You'd
think that all that T- billill issuance
would be so much supply of T bills that
it wouldn't be able to be soaked up by
the market. In other words, not enough
demand for it, which would drive prices
down and the interest rates higher. But
in reality, there is like almost an
insatiable demand for T bills because
there's basically no risk there. Aside
from lending your money to the Federal
Reserve who can print money to pay you
back plus interest, T bills are the next
lowest risk option. You don't have risk
of default now that the debt ceiling has
been raised. And let's be honest, even
before that, the risk of default was
basically zero anyway. You don't have
interest rate risk because it's such a
short duration that even if interest
rates move in that amount of time,
you're not locked up for that long. And
also, you don't really have any
inflation risk with T bills because it's
not like you're locking your money up
for 10, 20, 30 years. And you don't know
how much the dollar will be devalued
during that amount of time. And so from
financial institutions to corporations,
there's almost an unlimited demand for
T-Bells as they give you a way to
protect your money slightly from
inflation, have almost all the liquidity
that you need, and pretty much zero
risk. But despite all of that, on
Monday, June 30th, the Federal Reserve
had to intervene in the repo market
again for the first time since 2019.
Last week I made an entire video on this
topic, but basically it means reserves
are almost gone in the financial system.
Liquidity has been sucked dry and this
onslaught of borrowing number one just
to refill the Treasury general account
back up to about $850 billion represents
$500 billion of T- billill issuance
that's going to happen within the coming
weeks and months. Not to mention the
fact that all of the other spending that
is being planned now and that is being
unleashed is also going to have to get
borrowed for. This is exactly what
happened in September of 2019 when the
Federal Reserve was still trying to
taper its balance sheet engaged in
quantitative tightening. But the
government had borrowed and spent so
much that financial markets were tapped
out. Liquidity was gone. The repo market
almost blew up. They had to intervene
and restart QE. Remember, at the time
they called this not QE. The Fed had to
start injecting money to bail out the
repo market just like they did a few
weeks ago and quantitative easing
resumed again. We're in that exact same
position now with the Fed continuing to
try to decrease its balance sheet.
That's going to end. We're likely to see
a restart of QE and it probably won't be
enough. We'll probably also see lowering
of interest rates as well. If you
thought the rally in the stock market
over the last couple of months being up
30% since April was a lot, keep in mind
we are barely back over previous
all-time highs, just retracing the prior
crash. And all of this without lowering
interest rates, without restarting QE,
and now the government is about to drain
the last reserves out of the system,
forcing liquidity injections. If you are
not prepared for both the meltups in
asset classes and also the volatility
and flash crashes that will happen along
the way, then you need to get my hedged
hyperrowth portfolio blueprint. I've
designed it for markets exactly like
this. It give you a step-by-step plan on
what to do here so you maximize your
profit and taking advantage of all the
liquidity that's coming into the market
right now, but you also are not exposed
to downside risk. It's linked for you in
the description below. As always, thank
you so much for watching. Have a great
day.