The 40-year debt cycle is not slowing
down. And despite the fact that many
people were very hopeful that this
current administration would do
something about the outofcontrol
spending and the debt spiral loop that
we are caught in, what we are seeing is
the exact opposite. First, let me
explain what this 40-year debt cycle is.
The government over the course of about
four decades will lever itself up,
increasing its own debt relative to the
size of the economy that it can tax. in
this case the United States and then for
about the next 40 years it will delever
itself again its debt load relative to
the size of the GDP and then for about
40 years from there it will lever up yet
again and we are now at the point where
the US government needs to delever again
and given the factors that I'm going to
outline here the deleveraging that we
are looking at is almost certainly going
to be an inflationary deleveraging there
are other ways to delever that are
healthier for the economy and not as
unfair for the average taxpayer.
Inflationary deleveragings tend to help
out the political class, the connected,
and the already wealthy. And that is the
direction we are going down. Again, this
is the chart of the yield on the 10-year
US government Treasury bond. And you can
see this chart is the inverse of this
last one that we were looking at, which
is the debt to GDP ratio. In other
words, as the US government is levering
up, interest rates are falling. And then
once the US government has leveraged up
as much as they can and they have to
delever then interest rates start going
up. Keep in mind inflation goes up along
with this and then the pendulum starts
to swing the other way yet again once
interest rates and inflation peak and
the US government starts to lever up
again. From there interest rates start
to fall as the government leverages up
again until interest rates bottom out
and the whole thing starts over again.
The reason why nobody sees this coming
is number one, these cycles take a very
long time to play out. And number two,
while they're playing it out, it doesn't
seem like it's that painful or there's
any real danger in the future. Because
for 40 years from 1980 through 2020,
interest rates were falling, which meant
the government could lever up basically
as much as they wanted. They could take
on as much debt as they wanted, knowing
that in a year, 2 years, 3 years, they
could always just roll that debt over
and the interest rate on the debt in the
future would be cheaper. And so the cost
of growing the debt was actually
decreasing. It would cost less and less
over time to have more and more debt.
Many individuals do the exact same thing
with their own debt. If you know that
interest rates are going to go down in
the future, load up on debt right now,
do all your spending in the present, get
all the stuff that you want right now,
and you don't have to worry really about
paying much for it because in a couple
of years, you refinance that debt by
borrowing new debt and paying off the
old debt. And now the cost of paying for
that debt is way cheaper. Meanwhile,
you're still getting raises, you're
still getting promotions, you're getting
new jobs, and so your income is going
up. So, both on an absolute standpoint
and on a relative standpoint, your cost
of servicing that debt gets cheaper over
time, even though the total debt load is
growing. And that's exactly what happens
to the US government. But at a certain
point around 120%, you just can't keep
on going anymore. you start to have
problems like inflation, which we all
know inflation burst onto the scene
again in a very ugly fashion starting in
2020 when they printed $3 trillion out
of nothing and spent that money into the
economy. And the problem is once you're
at 120% debt to GDP and interest rates
are already at zero and inflation breaks
out, you can't keep on going down that
same playbook again. You can't just roll
over the debt at a lower interest rate
because rates are already at zero. And
by the way, if you do that, you're
injecting more money into the economy
which makes inflation go through the
roof. that automatically by itself
pushes interest rates higher because now
lenders want to be compensated for that
inflation that's happening. So they
demand a higher interest rate in order
to get compensated for that loss of
purchasing power. Now at the end of
World War II, the last time we went
through an inflationary deleveraging and
went from 120% debt to GDP ratio all the
way down to about 30. It was an
inflationary deleveraging. The Federal
Reserve engaged in yield curve control,
which meant they pegged interest rates
so that the government could borrow as
much as they want and wouldn't have to
worry about lenders not wanting to lend
them that money. The Federal Reserve
forced it to be lent at that rate, which
meant that the government was borrowing
at a rate that was lower than the rate
of inflation. In other words, negative
real interest rates. During this time,
we also had a big productivity boom. As
a population grew, men came home from
war, people entered the workforce, and
globalization took off underneath the
Bretton Woods agreement, producing cheap
goods for the United States. All these
factors came together, increasing the
size of the GDP. Even though interest
rates were going up that whole time, as
you can see from this chart, and
inflation was going up that whole time,
it still allowed the US government to
delever relative to the size of the
economy. Now, that is not the best way
to delever. If a government instead will
take the responsible route, and they
will delever through spending cuts, tax
cuts, essentially just getting smaller,
allowing more freedom for the economy to
flourish on its own. And it will stop
hurting the currency, devaluing it
through printing it into existence. It
allows all the deadwood in the system to
burn off. It undoes a lot of the
malinvestment. And so, a lot of people
who are relying on those money
transfers, those zombie companies, the
depreciation of the currency, that kind
of stuff does die. And the ownership of
all of those real assets gets
transferred to the productive economy,
laying the foundation for a very, very
healthy and strong economy going
forward. And many people were very
hopeful the current administration would
do exactly that. Partly because that's
one of the things that was campaigned
on. For instance, the original promise
from the Department of Governmental
Efficiency was to cut government
spending by $2 trillion. And now that
expectation has been reduced to about
$150 billion. Now, don't get me wrong,
that cutting of $150 billion is a good
thing. There's a lot of money that the
government is spending that they
shouldn't be spending. That's your the
money and that's my money. Those are
dollars left in our pockets and that is
a good thing. It's also true that it's
peanuts makes barely even a dent in what
the US government is doing. We also know
that the US military is one of the
largest expense items for the US
government. And Trump said that if he
reached agreements with rival nations,
the US could reduce runaway military
spending by as much as 50%. Military
spending is one of those categories that
Congress gives the military more
spending money than they even ask for
basically every year. That's why it's
called runaway spending. And in a
complete 180° turn, Trump just promised
$1 trillion in defense spending for next
year, which is more than before, not
anywhere near 50% less. In other words,
this administration campaigned on
getting rid of fraud, getting rid of
waste, bringing back austerity and
responsibility and reducing the deficit.
In other words, we bull punch money in
from taxes. We spend a bunch of money.
The difference there is crazy right now.
This is a chart of the surplus or the
deficit from the US government. You can
see that basically since 2001, it's been
getting worse and worse and worse every
single year. 2024, the deficit was a
staggering $2 trillion. And many people
were very hopeful that Trump would turn
this ship around. Right now, we are at
the halfway point of fiscal year 2025.
And I get it. Trump has only been in
office since January. But the spending
has done the opposite of slowed down. In
fact, it's sped up. The current fiscal
yeartoate deficit is at $1.3 trillion.
You can see that is 23% higher than this
exact same point last year. That puts us
on pace for a 2025 deficit of
$2.6
trillion. That's 9% of GDP. It's no
wonder that interest rates on US
government debt are moving higher. There
are many things causing interest rates
on government debt to move higher, but
one of them is certainly the expectation
that we are going to have increased
inflation from all the government
borrowing and spending that money into
existence. The deficit is not shrinking,
it is growing. The main reason for that
right now is because of spending
increases. But even if they slow down
spending, you would also have to pair
that without any tax cuts if you want to
fix the deficit. And yet, it seems that
is one thing that this current
administration is very, very focused on
is reducing tax income. Now, again, I
think that by itself is a great thing.
Every dollar that the government cuts in
taxes means that I get to keep more
money in my wallet. I will do better
things with my money than the government
will. I'm not bombing children in Yemen.
I'm investing in projects with a real
return on investment. I'm improving the
lives of people around me and I'm giving
money to businesses around me that are
being productive. I'm giving to charity,
helping homeless people, helping people
that are hungry get fed. Again, I'm
doing much better things with my money
than the government ever could. So, tax
cuts are welcome. But if you think for
one second that the government is
turning the ship around and they are
getting themselves into a better
financial position, then you've got
another thing coming. We are in a
long-term debt cycle that cannot be
turned around from replacing some
government employees with some software
programs. This is a long-term debt cycle
and we are in the midst of an
inflationary deleveraging. That means
higher prices over the coming decades.
That means higher interest rates over
the coming decades while the government
deleverages. And it also means much
higher asset prices because all that
money has to go somewhere first. This is
the canton effect. New money first hits
asset prices then hits the prices of
goods and services and then hits the
prices of wages. And certainly there are
ups and downs in any long-term cycle.
There are short-term time periods where
things move up and things move down. But
over the long run, I would not be
betting against the irresponsibility of
a government that has been digging a
hole for itself for over 100 years now
because everybody in a position of power
to do something is benefiting by that
continuing because it is a grift and
they are transferring wealth away from
the average taxpayer and the average
earner to themselves. And so turning
that ship around means cutting off their
own lifeline. And not a single person in
power who has the ability to push for
something like that is going to. The
good news is if you are aware of this,
you can take advantage of it. For
instance, taking advantage of the bare
markets that appear when they rarely do
because while we will have volatility,
asset prices will continue to move
higher as the money supply increases by
being borrowing and spent into
existence. And if you don't know how to
figure out which assets you should be
buying right now and what price you
should be buying them, in other words,
you don't know how to figure out if a
stock is actually on sale or not. Just
because it's fallen doesn't mean it's
trading at a discount or at a good
value. You have to be able to calculate
those things. If you don't know how to
do that, you need my bare market
investing guide. This is only going to
be useful while we're still in a bare
market, and these can end super rapidly.
I'm only going to have this fire sale on
my bare market investing guide while the
bare market lasts. So, don't wait too
long because if you do, it'll be too
late. It's linked in the description
below. As always, thank you so much for
watching.