China, Japan, and the United States are
all selling US Treasuries and central
banks around the world are buying gold
instead. This central bank activity is
having impacts on the market and it will
continue to have an impact on the market
for years if not decades to come. So,
the first big seller of US Treasuries,
we cannot ignore the United States
Treasury themselves. Anytime the US
government borrows money, that is the
same thing as them selling or issuing a
new Treasury. The national debt is
currently above $36 trillion
and with the deficit already at $710
billion
since October of 2024, the US government
is borrowing like never before, which
means it is selling Treasuries like
never before. But, we also can't forget
about the Federal Reserve, the central
bank in the United States. This is their
balance sheet and you can see when this
chart goes down, that is the Federal
Reserve selling Treasuries that it has
previously bought. This means what has
been happening for the last couple of
years is the opposite of QE. When QE is
happening, quantitative easing, the Fed
is printing money to buy up US
Treasuries. That drives the price up,
that drives interest rates down.
Instead, what has been happening for the
last couple of years is the opposite.
The Federal Reserve has been selling,
very slowly, Treasuries off of their
balance sheet, which has the opposite
impact of money printing. All else being
equal, this would decrease the money
supply. Now, we know all else is not
equal. Many financial institutions, like
banks, are doing the opposite. They are
lending money into existence and they
are buying US Treasuries. But, the
United States is not the only player in
town here. We are also going to need to
look at the other two very large
players, China, Japan. China and Japan
have both been selling US Treasuries at
near record paces. This is a big deal
because China and Japan are the biggest
foreign holders of US Treasuries. Now,
according to the US Treasuries internal
data, Japan and China, as of November of
2024, are still the largest foreign
holders of US Treasuries, but if they
continue selling, they could lose that
top spot soon considering the UK is not
far behind China. So, China, Japan, and
the Fed are all actively decreasing
their exposure to US Treasuries with
China about to drop below the UK in
terms of the total Treasuries it holds.
Now, you might look at how many
Treasuries the Fed owns and just by
looking at their total balance sheet,
you might assume that they have a very
large, historically speaking, balance of
US Treasuries. But, if instead we look
at this as a percent of the total debt
that is available, we can see that the
Federal Reserve's holding of US
Treasuries is back down to very close to
average levels. The Fed owns about 15%
of the US government's debt that is held
by the public. And while that percentage
has been pretty volatile, ranging from
7% up to 25% over the last two decades,
being around 15% where it is right now
is much closer to historical norms going
back to 2003. This is one of the reasons
why bond yields have continued to rise
over the past few years because US
Treasuries are being sold by everyone to
a much larger degree than they are being
purchased. We are seeing US Treasuries
be actively replaced around the world,
especially on central bank balance
sheets, and it is being replaced by
gold. This is a chart that shows the
monthly reported central bank activity
in terms of purchases or sales of gold.
Let me explain what you're looking at
here. Across the middle, there is the
zero line. Any blue bar that shows up
above the zero line represents a
purchase and any purple bar that shows
up below the zero line represents a
sale. Together, we can net these out to
see total net purchases versus net sales
and come up with the black line that
jumps around from bar to bar. And you
can see that over the past two years,
every single month outside of just a
couple of months in 2023, net purchases
by central banks have outpaced net
sales. This is the main reason why the
price of gold has risen so dramatically
over the last couple of years as well.
In fact, in just the last one year, the
price of gold is up about 35%.
Now, many times the price of gold will
go up because there is large purchasing
of gold in anticipation of future
inflation, future money printing to
handle debt crises by sovereign
governments. Now, this time, that is
certainly one of the reasons why we are
seeing gold be purchased at the pace
that it's being purchased right now.
But, another reason is simply because it
is a safe haven asset that maintains its
purchasing power and it has done so for
thousands of years. It represents an
asset that is not somebody else's
liability and in times of rising
geopolitical tensions and uncertainty
about the foundation of the global
financial system, in other words, US
debt, owning gold becomes less of a
luxury and more of a necessity. Now, I'm
not making the case that any country
anywhere in the world is going to make
any sort of a successful pushback
towards some sort of a gold standard
anytime soon. But, what I am saying is
that as a savings account, nothing has
beat gold for thousands of years and as
a way to preserve your purchasing power,
it is still the king. Now, the fact that
everybody is selling US Treasuries and
yields are rising is probably going to
have an impact on other things like the
stock market as well. If you take a look
at this very interesting chart, we are
seeing two lines. The blue line is the
earnings yield of the S&P 500. The pink
line is the yield on the US 10-year
Treasury. So, the earnings yield is the
percentage profit that companies that
are part of the S&P 500 generate. we
take a look at these two yields compared
to each other, we notice something very
interesting. There was very little
correlation between US Treasury yields
and the yield of the S&P 500 from the
early 1900s up until the 1960s. A lot of
that had to do with the Federal
Reserve's yield curve control as well as
the fallout from the Great Depression
and the World Wars. However, once we get
to about the '60s, we can see a fairly
tight correlation between the 10-year
yield and the S&P 500's earnings yield.
They rose pretty much in lockstep from
the '60s until the end of the '70s and
then have fallen pretty much in lockstep
for the last 40 years. But, if we zoom
in here recently, we can see that there
has been a dramatic rise in the yield of
the 10-year Treasury that has not yet
been followed by a dramatic rise in the
S&P 500's earnings yield. Now, this
could just be noise. But, if you think
about the implication of what this chart
is showing you, it would make sense to
see
upwards in the earnings yield of the S&P
500. Because if I invest $100 in the S&P
500 right now, I'm going to get back
about 3%, a little over 3% in terms of
the profit that those companies are
going to generate for me. Now, as just a
shareholder, I'm not going to have any
influence over whether all of those
profits will be passed back to me or
not. But, what is true is that if you
look at investing in the US 10-year
Treasury right now, you'll get about
4.6%
back on your money guaranteed for the
next 10 years, which you cannot say
about the S&P 500 because stocks
necessarily have risk inherent to them
that US Treasuries do not. And so, in a
very real sense right now, you are
paying a lot more for income by
investing in the S&P 500 than you are by
giving it to the US government. Now, I'm
not making the case that that is a good
bet, but what I am saying is that many
people will think that is a good bet.
This is the crowding out effect. Imagine
if the US government was offering 20% on
its bonds. Everybody would sell all of
their stocks and just give their money
to the US government instead because
that's guaranteed, the market is not.
And until the market, companies in the
stock market, were offering dividend
yields of 10, 15, 20, 25, 30%, it would
be very hard to compete with the US
government. Now, given the fact that we
are in the next phase of a long-term
debt cycle, that the next decade or two
decades will probably look very similar
to how it looked from 1940 through 1980,
very different than what we've
experienced for the last 40 years with
falling inflation and falling interest
rates and growing debt. Instead, what
we're probably going to see is a very
long and extended inflationary
deleveraging where the US government,
individuals, and institutions have to
deleverage, happens through inflation as
interest rates and prices continue to
rise, which means in the short term we
are very likely to see some volatility,
but also reversions to the mean. And
when you look at charts like this, it
would imply that somehow in some way, we
should expect the profits of the
companies inside the S&P 500 to play
catch-up. And that can happen from
profits increasing, but it can also
happen from the stock prices themselves
going down. Now, by the way, if you
would like to know the way that I am
investing for the long term given
everything that I know about how the
economy works, I've just released four
free a mini series I call the 11th
Century Stocks and in it I detail for
you, number one, my portfolio that I
believe could generate very strong
returns for the next 100 years. But,
number two, I show you my process for
selecting these individual stocks so
that you can do it for yourself. And
number three, I show you the way to
automate it so that you never have to
think about it and you can build your
long-term portfolio on autopilot. This
mini series is absolutely completely
free. You just need to click on the link
in the description below, enter your
email, and you'll have it. As always,
thank you so much for watching. Have a
great day.