It turns out that President Trump may be
trying to fire the Federal Reserve Chair
Jerome Powell very soon here. Now, it's
no secret that ever since the
inauguration, Trump has been pressuring
the Fed and specifically Powell to lower
rates. He's been posting about it
constantly, calling him names like too
late Powell and saying whatever he
thinks he needs to say to get Powell to
lower rates. Uh recently a scandal about
how much the Federal Reserve has been
spending on renovations at the Federal
Reserve's building could give Trump the
ammunition he needs in order to fire
Powell. If you don't remember, months
ago, Trump actually looked into whether
or not he could fire Powell. And due to
policy reasons, it was pretty much a
straightforward answer. No, you don't
have the authority to remove him.
However, with something like this used
as the scapegoat to remove Powell, it
might actually work. Apparently, the
Federal Reserve has spent $2.5 billion
on a renovation plan. And Trump told a
reporter that he thinks it sort of is a
fireball offense, specifically because
it seems that Powell may have lied to
Congress when he said that the
renovation would not include some of the
upgrades that were described in the
official plan documents that came out in
2021, which included things like Italian
beehives and new marble finishes. Now,
if you see something like that and it
kind of shocks you a little bit that a
government or quasi government, quasi
private building would need to have such
ornate finishes, then it's probably just
because you aren't familiar with how the
Federal Reserve operates. It is outside
the economy. It doesn't rely on taxes.
It doesn't rely on profits. It doesn't
need to generate revenue from sales. It
is the entity that creates the money. It
spends what it wants and needs to spend
because it doesn't need to give anything
of value whatsoever in order to get that
purchasing power. Now, you might think,
hey, well, that's just the government
overall. But even the government at the
end of the day is full of people who are
at least appointed by elected officials
who have to win votes. That does not
exist at the Federal Reserve. Good times
or bad, recession or boom. The employees
at the Federal Reserve sit on their nice
salaries doing their little research. It
is the largest employer of economic PhDs
in the world. They take their breaks.
They clock out. They don't get their
perks cut when the economy is down or
the business is struggling. That does
not exist for the Fed. So seeing plans
for upgrades like Italian beehives and
new marble finishes should not be
surprising. Okay, but getting back to
Trump firing Powell specifically to try
and get rates lower. It's not clear that
this will actually accomplish the goal
that Trump thinks it will because as of
right now, the yield on the 30-year US
Treasury has breached 5% yet again. The
20-year has also breached 5% and the
10-year is looking dangerously close to
a breakout that could also get it back
up to 5% which it briefly touched in
October of 2023. Now, because these
long-term interest rates are so high,
the US government has not been issuing a
ton of debt at this maturity. There's
simply not enough liquidity in the
markets, not enough lenders and money
willing to lend to the government for
that length of time at those high
interest rates. And so instead, for
years now, the government has been
rolling over all of its debt that's been
maturing into short-term debt, Ta bills,
debt that matures in under two years,
usually under one year. Now, it's not
like this debt has that much of a better
interest rate. A six-month T bill is
yielding 4.2% right now, but the idea is
that it's constantly rolling over, which
means if those long-term rates get to go
down at some point soon, then when all
of that short-term debt then finally
matures within the next couple of months
or the year, then they'll have all that
debt that they can refinance into
longerterm debt once those interest
rates are lower. They don't want to lock
up long-term rates for 10, 20, 30 years
right now when they're still so high.
And Trump has committed to rolling over
basically all the debt that matures into
short-term T bills until interest rates
go down. One of the reasons why he's
been pressuring Powell to lower rates.
But taking a look at the federal funds
rate, we can see what happened last time
the Fed lowered rates leading up to the
election in 2024. The Fed lowered the
Fed funds rate, which is the interest
rate it controls, from an effective rate
of 5.3% down to 4.3%. That happened from
August of 2024 through January of 2025.
However, if we look at what that did to
long-term interest rates, it took those
long-term yields from 4% all the way up
to 5% over that exact same time frame.
So, the Federal Reserve lowering rates,
the one rate that they control, which is
the Fed funds rate, actually had the
impact of increasing interest rates for
that longer term debt. Which means even
if Trump is able to convince Pal to
lower rates or even if he's able to fire
him and replace him with somebody who is
able to convince the Fed, hey, yeah, we
should lower interest rates, it's not
very clear that it will even have the
impact Trump is looking for by getting
those long-term rates lower. In fact,
it's very likely it has the opposite
effect and pushes long-term interest
rates much higher. Now, the reason for
this is because we are in a new phase of
the long-term debt cycle. It's not 1980
through 2020 anymore. Now inflation is
out of the bag. The time period we're in
right now with debt to GDP above 120%
inflation rising instead of inflation
falling. Things look much more similar
to the way they did from 1940 through
1980. Which means that when the central
bank, in this case the Federal Reserve,
lowers interest rates, they're lowering
the short end of the curve. That means
temporarily more spending and borrowing
from the government because they can
borrow more tea bills for much cheaper.
They can't borrow those long-term bonds
for cheaper, but they can certainly do
so with T- bills. All of that extra
money injected into the economy means
prices are going to go up. And lenders
understand this. And so, no lender is
going to lend at a lower rate
understanding that their purchasing
power is being eroded by inflation.
Which is why you get long-term rates
actually go up. because those long-term
rates as of right now are still at least
partially controlled by free market
influences, people buying and selling
those bonds. So, if you know inflation
is going to go up because, you know,
money is being printed and spent into
existence, then you're going to demand a
higher interest rate on those bonds that
won't get paid back to you for a lot
longer, which means this is the only
solution left. The Federal Reserve's
balance sheet is going to have to go up
again. In other words, they're going to
have to start quantitative easing. The
only way to meaningfully and
significantly get interest rates and
yields on those long-term bonds low
enough to where the government can roll
over $9 trillion of debt into long-term
bonds at a low interest rate is for the
Fed to buy those bonds themselves.
There's just not enough money and no
willing buyers in the system to take
that place because bond yields move as a
result of the supply and demand of the
bonds themselves. So you need a huge
buyer to come in and buy up all those
bonds that the government is issuing.
You need them to do so in such large
size that not only do interest rates not
get spiked from that, but they actually
stay low where the government wants
them. Which means whoever replaces
Powell, if Trump is able to fire him,
won't need to just lower interest rates.
They'll also need to restart QE to a
huge extent. Now, I've made a few videos
over the last couple of weeks about the
other things this administration is
doing right now in order to try and get
interest rates, especially long-term
rates down. One of them is the stable
coin legislation. Stable coin
legislation is to make sure that the
stable coins that exist and are being
spread around the world ultimately are
invested in treasuries. That's extra
treasury buying demand. Problem with
that, a lot of it is at the short end. A
lot of that is T bills. We also see the
Treasury General account being refilled
by Bessant. That could force another
liquidity injection by the Fed, but
again, that's just a short-term stop
gap. We see the proposal in Congress to
make the Federal Reserve stop paying
interest to banks on the reserves they
hold at the Fed. That would force a few
trillion dollars back into treasuries.
But again, a lot of that's going to be T
bills. And it's only about three maybe
four trillion or so. It's not the 9
trillion plus that the government needs.
We also see a push to deregulate the
banks and that could allow much more
demand, but also that's that comes with
its own set of politically unpopular
opinions. Again, just deregulating the
banks to let them buy more debt. And so
because all of these together seem like
they're not going to be big enough and
they're just temporary measures, it does
seem like the Federal Reserve is going
to need to start QE again in order to
get the full measure of long-term rates
low enough in order to absorb the full
demand of debt that the government has.
Got an insatiable appetite for borrowing
and somebody needs to buy the bonds that
they're issuing. Now, we've seen this
playbook play out many times throughout
history that eventually when you get
past that 120% debt to GDP ratio, you
get countries central banks doing things
like yield curve control, debt
monetization, and the central bank
really becomes the only or the most
significant buyer of government debt,
which means it's not actually debt. It's
just called inflationary financing. It
looks like debt, but because the
government owes it to the central bank
and the central bank sweeps profits back
to the government, the government's just
really printing whatever money is
necessary in order to cover the deficit.
In short, expect inflation first in
asset prices and then in goods and
services. And even if the Fed lowers
interest rates, even if that impacts
interest rates for you and I for a very
short amount of time, it won't last
long. So, if it does push things like
mortgage rates lower, take advantage
while you can. Now if you are not
prepared, your portfolio is not
protected from the volatility that this
is going to cause in markets and you are
not prepared for the asset price
inflation properly allocated across
uncorrelated classes of assets, you need
my hyperrowth portfolio blueprint. I
give you a stepby-step guide in order to
prepare yourself, number one, to profit
off of everything that is happening
right now, but also to protect yourself
against that downside volatility that
happens in markets that are inflated
artificially from a bunch of money
printing. If you don't have it already,
get it with the link in the description
below. As always, thanks so much for
watching. Every day.