Are you currently investing in the most
overvalued stock market in US history?
You might be. This is a chart of the
Schiller PE ratio for the S&P 500, which
is a very common valuation metric for
stocks. You can see that right now the
S&P 500 is sitting at the second most
overvalued it's ever been, second only
to the dot bubble. Now, if you want to
take a look at just the straight up PE
ratio for the S&P 500, you can see we
aren't quite at the second highest in
history, but we are at the fourth
highest PE ratio. The couple of spikes
that have exceeded the current PE ratio
were the bubble that happened in 2020
and 2021 after all the money printing
obviously the dot bubble and then we
have a brief large spike in valuations
when the recession from the financial
crisis hit before stock prices fully
adjusted down. But that's not all. We
also have what's called the Buffett
indicator. This is the Wilshshire 5000
index compared to GDP. Now you can see
for years now this buffet indicator has
been very elevated compared to where it
usually is especially for you know a
century prior. But even just zooming in
on the last couple of years you can see
the Buffett indicator is the highest
it's ever been. So should you run for
the hills, sell everything, maybe even
short everything, buy a bunch of puts?
Not so fast. Because the question is not
are stocks overvalued. The proper
question is compared to what? I would
like to highlight for you the PE ratio
of this specific stock index. You can
see it reached 6,000. Before I show you
what index this is that hit a PE ratio
of 6,000, this is currently, by the way,
this is not in the past. I want you to
take a look at one of the most
overvalued stocks in the S&P 500 right
now with a price toearnings ratio of
676. If you're not familiar with a price
toearnings ratio, it takes the price of
the stock and then it looks at how much
money the company earns in profits, not
revenue, how much it keeps in profits,
and compares those two as a ratio. To
understand what it means, you just say,
"Okay, if this company decided to pay
out as a dividend 100% of its profits
every year, how many years would it take
for me to get back the price per share
for Palanteer?" Right now, as of the
time of this recording, that would be
676
years. If they took all their profits
and paid 100% of profits out as a
dividend every single year, you would
get back your price per share, your
initial investment in 676 years, that is
nothing compared to this entire index,
which isn't even just one stock as an
outlier compared to the rest of the
stocks in the index. This is the entire
index. Has a PE ratio of 6,000 and a
staggering price to sales ratio of
almost 2700. Meaning, if you did the
same thing, but instead of paying out
profits, you paid out all of your
revenue, and you could just ignore your
expenses, it would still be 2700 years
before you could pay back the cost of
investing in the entire index. So, what
index is this? Well, you might not be
surprised, but it is the stock market in
Venezuela. Now, you might rightfully be
thinking that it's not really fair to
compare overvaluations in stocks in the
United States with extreme valuations in
a country going through actual
hyperinflation. And you're right about
that. However, I'm pointing out the
extreme to answer the question, well,
how high can it go? How much more
overvalued can stocks get? The answer is
it depends on what the denominator does.
Why are people investing in those stocks
in the first place? 100 years ago when
you invested in a company, the only
reason you would do that is because you
had a high degree of confidence that
that company was going to produce
profits and pay those profits to you.
But in a world of constantly devaluing
fiat currency, that is not the primary
consideration anymore. More and more
today, the primary consideration when
making an investment is, is this going
to at least protect my purchasing power
from inflation? And the reality is as
expectations of future currency
devaluation increase, so does the trend
of buying assets at higher and higher
valuations because despite the fact that
they're expensive, it's still better
than the alternative. Now, that thought
experiment alone does not prove anything
because in the past when we've seen
crazy high valuations, we've seen the
stock market correct. like during the
dotcom bubble, it finally burst,
valuations came back down to a normal
level again. So just noting the fact
that people want to protect their
purchasing power and so they're willing
to invest at higher and higher prices
does not mean that you shouldn't be
careful of overvalued assets. But
anytime somebody says something is
cheap, expensive, overvalued,
undervalued, you always have to ask the
question compared to what? This is the
chart of the S&P 500 priced in gold
instead of dollars. For reference, this
is the S&P 500 priced in dollars. So
when you price the S&P 500 in terms of
gold instead of dollars, you get a much
different picture. This runup and then
crash you see was the Great Depression.
This runup that you see following the
1940s is the post Bretonwoods agreement.
This crash that you see starting around
1971
was from the end of the Brettonwoods
agreement delinking from gold and having
gold skyrocket to its proper value
again. So stocks relative to gold became
very cheap again. This big runup in
stocks compared to gold was the dot
bubble. This collapse in the price of
stocks compared to gold was both the
crash in stocks that happened as of the
dotcom bubble bursting and the great
financial crisis, but also the bubble
that occurred in gold up until 2011.
Stocks have had some massive bull
markets since then, but also so has
gold, which has put the current pricing
of the S&P 500 compared to gold in a
very normal and comfortable range
historically speaking going all the way
back to the 1960s. Now, if pricing
stocks in gold doesn't prove the point
by itself, let's price something else in
gold that also seems historically
overvalued right now, and that is US
real estate. You might be shocked to see
this chart, but homes in the United
States are not expensive right now when
priced in gold. In fact, they're at one
of the cheapest places they've ever
been. So, with some of these assets like
Bitcoin and real estate and the stock
market being at some of the highest
prices they've ever been in history and
these valuation metrics like the
Schiller PE ratio and the Buffett
indicator being at the most extended
they've been, it's becoming clear that
these things are expensive compared to
dollars. Which means that maybe the
problem is not with the valuation of the
assets or the price. Maybe the problem
is with the denominator, the dollar. I
mean, just look at this chart again,
which is the chart of the stock market
in Venezuela. You'd look at a chart like
this, if you didn't know what it was,
and think, man, that is something I
would have liked to own. It just goes
straight up. And that's the point. When
the money is being devalued, people buy
whatever they can to protect their
purchasing power. The value or
traditional valuation metrics matter
less and less. This shows that valuation
extremes today indicate that there is a
growing expectation that the near future
will experience dollar devaluation from
excess government spending, excess
government borrowing, and inflation.
Now, don't get me wrong. I definitely am
not saying this means that there's no
crash coming, that crashes can't happen.
In fact, even in a place where the stock
market looks like a hockey stick, in
2018, it still suffered a collapse of
94% in dollar terms, extreme volatility
and crashes can absolutely still happen
even if there is a flight or a panic
into safety. In fact, if anything, this
means that you need to be more and more
careful with the assets that you choose,
what percentage of your portfolio you
are putting into each asset, and that
you know how to do proper valuation
yourself. If you don't know how to hedge
your portfolio, how to protect your
assets from inflation and from crashes,
and how to pick highquality stocks, and
then finally, to know what price you
should be buying them at. Don't worry,
I've got you. I have laid out a
step-by-step plan that teaches you
exactly how to do every single one of
those things. It's called the hedged
hyperrowth portfolio blueprint. I've got
it linked for you in the description
below. Go check it out. As always, thank
you so much for watching. Have a great
day.