Are you earning $300,000 a year and
still struggling to make ends meet?
Well, if so, you're not alone. A recent
study by BHG Financial found that 62%
of high earners still struggle with
credit card debt. And in this study,
they defined high earners as those with
salaries over $300,000 per year. And a
whopping 62% of them still struggled
with credit card debt. This is why basic
personal finance skills are necessary
because it is actually easy to outspend
any income. I'm sure you've all heard of
the lottery winners and the professional
athletes that a few years after they win
the lottery or a few years after they
leave the league, they are broke. They
are bankrupt. They are selling their
Super Bowl rings just to be able to pay
the rent. Now, don't get me wrong, this
isn't something that you should feel
guilty or ashamed about if you are in
this boat. Like I said, it is easy to
outspend any income. That's why they
call it a hedonic treadmill. You're
walking. In other words, you're
performing actions that feel like you're
getting ahead, but you're staying in
place. You get that raise. You get that
promotion. You get that new job. You
start making more money. And so, you
sell the beater and get a new Beamer.
You move into the nicer neighborhood,
but that also means that you're going to
have to send your kids to a different
school. And it's a private school. Your
wife sees your new car. She wants the
Lexus. And man, that stress of that new
job, you need to unwind. So, you're
taking more than one vacation per year,
and you're not going to the places that
you used to go. That new house in that
new neighborhood that you just moved
into wasn't quite what you were
expecting. And there's some little
remodel projects, some little
renovations that you have to do along
the way. And before you know it, you
look up and you've got 20 to $30,000 a
month just in payments that you can't
get out of. You look around and realize
all this money that you've been making
is just going out the door and you've
got nothing to show for it. You thought
making $300 or $400,000 a year would
make you set. You thought it would allow
you to retire early, but it feels like
you're in an even worse financial
position than you used to be when you
were making far less. Now, it may not be
entirely your fault that you're in this
situation. Maybe you have a spouse or
you have kids or there's inflation.
There's political things that are going
against you. But guess what? It is your
responsibility whether it's your fault
or not. In a recent study that the
Federal Reserve just did, they found
that those who are making at least
$150,000 annually are seeing the biggest
jumps in delinquencies on their debt
payments. Right now, you can see a
direct correlation between the more
money households are making and the
faster they are missing payments on
their debt. Again, if this is you, you
shouldn't be feeling guilt or shame.
This should be a wake-up call that if
you live the way everybody else does,
you'll be experiencing the consequences
that everybody else does. Financial
discipline and making the correct
decisions with your money is important.
Not because skipping Starbucks in the
morning is going to make you a
millionaire, but because at some point
in your life, you are very likely to be
a high income earner. And if you don't
already know the right things to do with
your money and have the discipline to
actually do it, you will waste those
high income earning years. In his book,
Skin in the Game, author Nim Taleb
pointed out research that in the United
States of America, about 10% of
Americans will spend at least one year
in the top 1% of income earners. And he
found that more than half of all
Americans will spend at least a year in
the top 10%. Broken down even further,
he found that 39% of Americans will
spend at least a year in the top 5% of
income. And almost 3/4, 73% of people
will spend at least a year in the top
20% of income earners. Income mobility
in the United States is still among the
best in the world, which means you have
a very high likelihood of achieving a
high income for at least some number of
years in your life. And if you haven't
already built the skills to save, to
delay gratification, to budget, to stay
out of debt, and to invest well what you
keep, then you will waste those high
income earning years. You'll spend the
money on comfort, convenience, upgrading
your lifestyle, and you'll be left with
nothing to show for it but regret. If
you can't save 5,000 from 50,000, you'll
never save 50,000 from 500,000. Now,
quick note, when I say save, what I mean
is keep. The difference between what you
earn and what you spend. I'm assuming
that you know you have to do something
with the money that you keep other than
just letting it stay in cash because
inflation will burn away your purchasing
power. you have to invest it and make
that money work for you. I'll talk more
on that in a moment. Just for now,
understand when I say save, I'm just
meaning keep and doing well with it.
Okay. So, if it is so easy to make a
really fantastic income and just spend
it all, how important is income to total
wealth? Well, it's actually very
important. In a recent article from Nick
Majiuli from of Dollars and Data, he
points out that the strongest predictive
indicator of total wealth is your
income. In other words, the median
income for people with a net worth of
$10,000 or less was only $32,000. The
median income for households with a net
worth between $10,000 and $100,000 was
an income of $47,000. the median income
increases along with net worth without a
break in the pattern. In other words,
it's rare to have high income with low
wealth. It's also rare to have low
wealth with high income. He points out
data from another study which tracks
household income and net worth over time
and found that for households that were
able to increase their net worth from
one level to the next like going from
under a million to over a million on
average had 52% higher incomes than
people who stayed stuck under a million.
So it is clear income is absolutely
necessary to wealth creation. Where are
you going to get your wealth from if you
don't have income? It is also
self-evident that the more income you
have, the easier on paper it is to
increase your total wealth. But you
still have to do the right thing with
it. In other words, keep it and invest
it. So income is necessary for wealth
production. It is not sufficient. Also,
financial discipline is necessary to
wealth creation. It is also not
sufficient because here's the other
harsh truth. It is not possible to
coupon clip your way to wealth. It
doesn't matter how many years you scrimp
and save and you shop at the dollar
store and you invest every penny if
you're only making $40,000 a year. You
might become a millionaire by the time
you're 81. Alternatively, you could
focus all of that time and energy and
attention on increasing your income. And
as long as you have the basics down of
staying out of highinterest debt,
keeping your expenses low instead of
riding that hydonic treadmill and
investing everything you keep, then you
will produce wealth far faster. Now, I
mentioned highinterest debt, and I mean
that specifically, not just all debt,
because we saw right now that households
earning over $150,000
are experiencing a faster increase in
debt defaults and delinquencies than
lower income households. And if you are
delinquent or missing payments on credit
card debt, that means you are carrying a
credit card balance. And today, the
average credit card interest rate is
over 21%. Now,
21% is what you're paying to keep debt
on a car. In other words, you're
increasing all of those expenses by 21%.
You are an investment to the credit card
company, earning them 21%. Now, this is
how crazy this is. Warren Buffett is
widely considered to be one of, if not
the greatest investor of all time. His
lifetime compound annual growth rate on
his investments from 1965 through 2024
is 19.9%.
Which means unless you are a better
investor than Warren Buffett, there is
no better return for you than paying off
your credit card debt as quickly as
possible. Mathematically, you will get
farther ahead fastest by paying that off
with every extra penny you have because
it is taking you into the hole at 21%
every year. And the best investor of all
time can't even outperform that. Once
you get that debt paid off and ideally
other highinterest rate debt like
personal loans and auto loans as well
because those are also costing you
money, you're actually going to be able
to afford purchasing nicer things faster
because when you save up for purchases
first, that money, as long as you're
doing the right thing with it, is
earning you money along the way, which
means it takes you less time and less of
your labor in order to be able to afford
the things that you want. Now, if you're
sitting there in a decent financial
position and you're thinking, "Man, this
is actually really terrible for our
country and our economy. It's a bad
sign." Don't worry. Let me show you a
few pieces of data that will show you
statistically nationwide, we're actually
not doing too bad. So, first, if you
just look at the total dollar amounts of
debt, like total credit card debt in the
US, you'll look at this chart and think,
man, we're doing terrible. Credit card
debt just keeps on growing. But also the
total number of dollars in circulation
is higher than it used to be. It's
always growing. The size of the economy
is always growing. People's incomes are
always growing, especially because of
inflation. So you have to compare the
total debt to something. And if we
compare it to GDP, you can see that
really over the last 15 years or so,
credit card debt compared to GDP has not
really changed that much. If anything,
on average, it's drifted slightly lower.
So, while there are certainly some
households out there that are still
making bad decisions and are suffering
as a result, it doesn't necessarily
indicate that overall the entire economy
that our nation is facing any sort of
economic doom as a result. And just to
prove that, let's look at one other data
point. This is US household debt to
assets. And when I first saw this chart,
I was absolutely shocked. I couldn't
believe it. But if you take all of the
household debt in the United States and
you compare that to the dollar value of
the assets that American households own,
the ratio is the best it's been in
almost 50 years. The debt to asset ratio
was getting worse from pretty much the
time we left the gold standard until the
great financial crisis when US
households topped out on debt and their
asset values crashed. But that was the
peak and really ever since then
especially I think brought on partly
because of the pain that a lot of people
financial pain a lot of people grew up
with and they saw I don't never want to
have to deal with that again. The
household debt to asset ratio has just
been plummeting and obviously these are
totals. So there are some households
that have a lot of debt compared to
their assets. There are other households
that have a lot of assets compared to
their debt. But it is still a fact that
this chart being lower is a lot better
than it being higher. If this video does
anything for you, I hope it encourages
you to control the controllables despite
the economic uncertainty, despite
interest rates, despite inflation,
despite incomes, despite AI or anything
like that. The only person who is
responsible for your financial future is
you. You can't control what the
president does. You can't control what
Jerome Powell does. You can't control
what your boss or your company does. The
only thing you can control is what you
do with what you have. And people who
were dealt far worse hands than you have
done far better. And people who have
been dealt far better hands than you
have done far worse. And it's up to you
to decide what you are going to do with
what you have from here on out despite
where you've been before. And if you are
not currently on track with a proven
plan to become financially free, I have
a step-by-step guide for you. It's
called the Hyperrowth Portfolio
Blueprint. It'll take you from zero to
hero. give you every step you need to
produce lifechanging wealth that lasts.
It's linked in the description below and
it's on sale right now. So, go ahead and
grab it right now. As always, thank you
guys so much for watching. Have a great
day.