You may soon be getting a pay raise in
the form of a tax cut. One thing that is
keeping me cautiously optimistic about
the economy over the next couple of
years is that we do not know what kind
of tax cuts are going to be implemented
and they could be great. And recently,
President Trump has been talking about
some of the things that he's trying to
get passed. In the coming weeks and
months, we will pass the largest tax
cuts in American history. And that will
include no tax on tips, no tax on social
security, no tax on
overtime. It's called the one big
beautiful bill and it will be the
biggest bill ever passed in our
country's history. It will include the
biggest tax cuts, regulation cuts,
military supremacy, and just about
everything else. We will cut more than
$1 trillion in wasteful and unnecessary
spending. Now, obviously, we've seen a
ton of things promised that have been
completely ignored or walked back at
this point, but let's go through some of
the tax proposals that will make your
life much better off. Now, just in case
you don't understand why tax cuts would
be beneficial for you, I want you to go
look at your payub and see that if you
currently make 100 grand, you actually
walk away with probably 60 65 grand.
Would your life be better off if you
walked away with 75 or 85 or maybe even
crazy idea you kept all of it? I know
what a wild concept that you actually
would maybe get to keep what belongs to
you. Would you be able to save more?
Would you be able to invest more? Would
you be able to buy healthier food? Would
you be able to do better things for your
family? Maybe send them to a better
school? Maybe go to the gym and get
healthier? Now multiply that by
literally every person in the entire
country and you can see how quickly tax
cuts could spiral into prosperity. Now,
there is a problem with this that I'll
touch on at the end, but let's first go
through all the proposed tax cuts.
First, let's look at family and child
related tax proposals. Number one, we
have a $5,000 baby bonus, which is a
one-time $5,000 payment to new mothers.
Now, this would be an attempt to combat
the declining population. Fun fact, the
United States birth rate has been below
replacement level since the 1970s. The
only reason we've had a growing
population that entire time is because
of immigration. Without immigration, we
would have had a declining population
decades ago and been in the same
situation that places like China are in
today. Not good. A demographics collapse
is pretty much impossible to grow your
way out of. And so, a baby bonus of
$5,000 to new mothers is one tax cut
aimed at
incentivizing having kids to try and
start a new baby boom. That's not all.
We have expanded child tax credit and
child care tax credit proposals. Tax
credits are extremely powerful because
if you make, let's say, $100,000 and
you're going to owe, let's say, $30,000
in taxes. A tax credit will offset what
you owe dollar fordoll. A tax deduction,
on the other hand, is a lot less
powerful because let's say if you make
$100,000 of taxable income, a deduction
just says, "Okay, we're only going to
say you made $90,000 in taxable income."
In other words, a deduction shrinks the
amount that you're going to owe taxes
on, whereas a credit shrinks the amount
of dollars of taxes you actually owe.
Next, let's take a look at business and
investment tax cut proposals. These ones
are especially powerful because business
quite literally drives the growth of
this country. All employees get their
income from businesses and in fact all
income comes from doing business. And so
any amount the government takes its boot
off the neck of American businesses
contributes to rapid and almost
instantaneous growth. First and probably
most important, we have a proposal to
restore 100% bonus depreciation and make
it retroactive for the entire year of
2025. The way that businesses pay taxes
is different than the way individuals
pay taxes. You're an individual and you
make 100 grand. You're going to pay your
taxes and then you get to spend or do
whatever you want with whatever's left
over. You're a business, you have all of
your income. You spend some of that
income on your business expenses and
then whatever's left over, you're going
to pay taxes on that. But there is a
catch because if you're a business and
you spend money on things that are
usually pretty expensive, the IRS says,
"Okay, well wait, you don't actually get
to deduct all of that in the year that
you spend that money. Instead, we're
going to let you deduct that over a very
long time period." This is for things
like equipment, real estate, vehicles,
planes, and some other large expenses.
But bonus depreciation applies to
certain categories of those large
expenses and says, "Wait, we're going to
flip this back the other way and let you
actually expense it all in year one."
This allows businesses to actually spend
money on the things that they want to
spend money on that will help their
business grow because they don't have to
worry about paying taxes on income that
they no longer have because they spent
it on something. Next, we have a
proposal to take the corporate tax rate
down to only 15%. Now, recently the
rhetoric around this has been that that
will only apply to businesses and
products that are exclusively made in
the United States. But something like a
15% tax rate, corporate tax rate, would
make the United States a tax haven
around the world. It could bring a ton
of business to the US. A lot of people
would complain, oh, that's just more
money left in corporate hands, in the
hands of the elite. But if that extra
money is not spent on growth, then all
that does is increase profits, which
increases the value of your 401k. Over
half of American households are invested
in the stock market. And if it does get
reinvested into growth, then that's more
money in the hands of employees in their
paychecks. So, good news either way.
Okay, now the big one. Let's take a look
at some individual tax cut proposals.
Number one, we have no tax on tips and
no tax on overtime. This is something
that Trump campaigned on and gained huge
popularity. This one is, I think,
fantastic because largely the people who
make a lot of tips and work a lot of
overtime are lower income. This goes
directly to the least well-off people in
the United States. It is not a tax cut
for people who don't need it as much.
Higher income is almost always exempt
and so there is no overtime being paid
anyway, even if they are working more
hours. No tax on tips and overtime also
incentivizes both employees and
employers to allow more of this work
because it just doesn't cost as much and
there is a bigger benefit to being able
to do so which means it also
incentivizes more work which is more
productivity. Next is a proposal to end
taxes on social security payouts. Now
this one I'm mixed on because on one
hand I'm always a fan of tax cuts. On
the other hand, social security is by
definition a direct wealth transfer from
young poor people to old rich people.
The number one highest correlation of
wealth is age because the older you are,
the more time you have had to build
wealth and make more money. And social
security is not means tested. But
everybody paying those social security
benefits are the people who are younger,
therefore poorer, and they're still
working. So it's a wealth transfer from
young, poor, productive people to old,
rich, unproductive people by definition.
You might say that's a good thing, but
that's still actually what's happening.
So to cut taxes on social security
payouts will absolutely be beneficial to
the people receiving social security
payouts, just not where those cuts are
needed most right now. We also see a
proposal to make auto loan interest tax
deductible, which again, I'm all for
cutting taxes. This is just a drop in
the bucket. It's not going to make a
meaningful difference to people. Yes, I
know the average car loan today is like
$700 per month, but the amount of
interest on that is not that much,
especially over a year. And to just have
that as apply as a deduction against
your taxable income, it's not going to
make a meaningful impact in the amount
of taxes that the average household
pays. It is on the other hand probably
going to incentivize a few more dumb
people to make a few more dumb decisions
about how big of a uh an auto loan they
get on their next new car. Now, the
biggest craziest tax proposal so far
that we have heard is that Americans
earning under $200,000 a year could
perhaps pay no income tax. Now, this
number has changed from $150,000 to
$200,000. Whether that is looking at
individuals or households, we don't
know. These are just proposals, but it
has been talked about very consistently.
And this would be absolutely monstrous.
The vast majority of US households make
much less than $200,000 per year, which
means for most US households, if
something like this actually makes it
through, it would mean your tax bill
federally goes to a big fat zero. It is
not quantifiable how much this would
positively impact the everyday lives of
almost all Americans, even those making
over that amount. Because the wealth
effect of so many people receiving so
much more money at the end of their
paycheck and being able to spend that
and invest that would produce an insane
wealth engine, an insane growth, a
spiral of prosperity. And because of how
good and juicy this sounds to me, I'm
almost certain that it won't happen. But
we can wait optimistically. Now, at the
beginning of the video, I did mention
that there is a dark side or a bad side
to all of these tax cuts. And while I am
a huge proponent of tax cuts because let
me keep more of my money. It belongs to
me. Especially if I don't agree with how
you are spending it, there is a problem.
And that problem is the fact that the US
government receives 50% of its tax
income from individual income taxes and
37% of its income from social security
and Medicare taxes. Which means that
almost 90% of all taxes that the US
government receives come from individual
employees. And that total last year
amounted to almost $5 trillion that it
took from productive workers and
productive businesses. $5 trillion. Yet
even that is not enough because every
year the deficit widens. The deficit is
the amount the US government borrows on
top of what it takes in taxes. Which
means if this number goes down and the
US government decreases the amount it
takes in taxes. But this number
continues to go up which is the amount
the government spends then this number
the deficit will continue to get worse
and worse. Last year the US government
took $5 trillion in taxes but they spent
$7 trillion. That means they borrowed $2
trillion added that to the debt and now
they have to pay interest on that as
well as the rest of the national debt
for basically eternity. So all of these
tax cuts overall are actually kind of
useless if they're not also paired with
spending cuts because it's not like that
money is just free. It doesn't come from
nowhere. They're taking that purchasing
power one way or the other if the
spending stays high. When they borrow
that money, that money gets lent into
existence. That's inflation. And so
either you are going to be paying the
government's bills through seeing a
dollar amount come out of your paycheck
or you're going to be paying the
government's bills by watching the
prices tick up higher at the grocery
store. Either way, you are footing their
bill. And so if this spending number
doesn't drastically shrink to the point
where this deficit comes close to zero,
none of the tax cuts will mean anything.
Now obviously for people like you and I
who pay attention and we understand how
these things work. We can prepare
ourselves for this and we can still
benefit when you invest in
inflationprotected assets. Then you get
to benefit by the tax cuts because you
have more dollars and you then get to
benefit from the inflation because you
put those dollars into assets that will
grow that will protect you from that
inflation. So some people like us are
going to benefit from this. But it does
come at the expense of everybody else
who has no clue about how this stuff
works and wonders why even after tax
cuts they are still struggling to make
ends meet. And so while I do really hope
that we see some really fantastic tax
cuts over the next couple of months get
set into stone, I hope even more so that
it will be paired with spending cuts.
Otherwise, it's useless. If you'd like
me to help you apply ideas like this to
your investing so that you can prepare
for this almost inevitable inflation
that is coming and also profit from it,
go ahead and click on the link in the
description below. As always, thanks so
much for watching. Every day.