Are you invested in the standard 60/40
portfolio? If so, you might be leaving
gains on the table or even worse,
exposing yourself to risk of major loss
over the coming years and decades. In
fact, even Black Rockck has now moved
away from the standard 60/40 portfolio
advice, saying that investors can profit
from diversifying beyond it. So, what is
the standard 60/40 portfolio? This is
considered traditional financial advice,
even though historically it's actually
relatively new. And it says that you
should have a mix of both stocks and
bonds. The younger you are, the more
stocks you have and the fewer bonds. And
as you get older, you switch out that
allocation so that when you're really
old, you have mostly bonds and few
stocks. The idea behind this is that
when you're young, you want to take on
more risk for more potential growth. And
as you age, you don't want as much
exposure to volatility and you want more
bonds for predictable income. The other
reasoning behind it is that as markets
crash, usually bonds are the safe haven.
And so when your stock portfolio goes
down, your bond portfolio will go up and
that will compensate for some of your
losses along the way. You can rebalance
and overall your gains will be smoother
and hopefully even better. The problem
is as the wise yogi barra once said in
theory there is no difference between
theory and practice but in practice
there is. Now this idea goes along with
Harry Marowitz's theory called modern
portfolio theory that he developed in
the 50s which establishes an efficient
frontier with all investing strategies
and that basically if you want more
returns you have to be willing to accept
more risk and there's always a trade-off
there and if you don't want to accept
the higher levels of risk then you will
just have to be okay with accepting
lower levels of returns. Now, many
people are not aware that Harry Marowitz
actually hated this theory. Within just
a few short years of publishing it, he
was trying to get people to not accept
it, not talk about it, and he was
saying, "Hey, I was wrong here." And
unfortunately, it still took off. But
the reason why he was saying, "Hey,
people shouldn't be looking at this and
basing their investing decisions off of
this," is because it assumed a normal
distribution of returns in markets,
which doesn't exist. In life, there are
two forms of distributions of outcomes.
You can either have a bell curve or
normal distribution or you can have a
power curve, also known as a parrito
distribution. Things like human weight
and human height fall into the category
of a normal distribution. In other
words, most people fall into the middle
categories here of being average height
or average weight. Yes, there are some
people with lower height or lower weight
and some people with higher weight and
height, but the vast majority fall in
the middle. But there are other things
in life that don't follow a normal
distribution. Things like wealth,
population of cities, the density in
galaxies, and many other things across
nature follow power law distributions.
In other words, a small percentage of
the people hold a large percentage of
all the wealth and the rest of the
wealth is not evenly distributed, but it
is distributed among everybody else to a
smaller and smaller extent. The same
thing is true of population in cities. A
few cities have almost all the
population. A few galaxies have almost
all the mass and the rest is spread out
among a high number of low performers.
This is exactly how markets work as
well. Markets do not follow a normal
distribution of returns. Both in terms
of time periods, in terms of asset
classes, and in terms of individual
assets, they all follow power law
distributions. This is why when you look
at stock market indexes like the S&P
500, the vast majority of the overall
performance of an index made up by 500
companies comes from only the top 10
companies in the index. This is not a
problem of how the system is
constructed. This is the very nature of
anything that is not governed by those
normal distribution laws just in nature
inherently. This is how stuff like this
just works. This is not something that
can be changed with policy, with laws,
with technology or good intentions. You
might be able to change which companies
get those outsized returns for the
entire index, but you can't change that
it happens. Now, the second big problem
with constructing your portfolio based
off of these outdated and disproven
theories is that we are not in a bond
bull market anymore, which means you
shouldn't be allocating 10% of your
portfolio to government bonds, let alone
40% or more. This is a chart of interest
rates from 1980 through 2020. And you
can see that it does one thing and one
thing only, and that is go down.
Interest rates and bond prices are
inversely correlated. When rates are
dropping, that means bond prices are
rising and vice versa. Which means for
40 years, from 1980 through 2020, bonds
were in a bull market. Which means for
longer than your financial adviser has
been in business, and for many financial
adviserss, longer than they've been
alive, bonds have only done one thing,
and that is go up in value. The industry
is built on thinking this is normal. But
guess what? It's not normal. Because if
we take this chart back and we look at
what happened from 1940 through 1980,
which is the 40 years that preceded the
last 40, we can see that rates did the
exact opposite. They only went up for 40
years straight, which meant for the
prior 40 years, bonds were in a
perpetual bare market, which meant they
were the last thing that you wanted to
hold on to in your portfolio for the
long term, especially if you might have
to sell them prior to maturity because
you would be taking a loss. And finally,
I want you to take a look at this chart,
which is what interest rates have done
since they bottomed in 2020 at the end
of that last cycle. And that is again,
they've been going up. We are in a new
phase of the long-term debt cycle. The
one from 1980 to 2020 has ended. That
was a disinflationary levering up from
the government that caused interest
rates to go down as the government
borrowed more and more, stimulating the
economy and boosting asset prices. But
the next 20 to 40 years will look very
different than the last 40 years and
will look much more similar to the 40
years that preceded that. In other
words, the government will need to go
through a deleveraging. It will be
inflationary just like the ' 40s through
the 80s. Inflation will be moving higher
and rates for everybody like us will be
moving up which means we have entered
into a new bond bare market just like
happened from 1940 through 1980. And
most people advising you on what to do
with your money were not alive back then
and were certainly not in business. And
they have built their entire career off
of the assumption that interest rates
will always go down. And it's because
they haven't lived through a
deleveraging. They've only lived through
governments levering up. I want to be
clear. I am not saying that I think
government spending will go down. I'm
not saying I think government taxing
will go down, at least not significantly
over the long term. I'm not saying that
government borrowing will go down or
even the national debt will go down.
What I am saying is they're going to be
printing more and more in order to pay
for that increase in spending with the
goal of GDP growing faster than their
debt. Because for a government, the only
thing they care about is their tax base.
Does their tax base grow at a rate that
can pay for their debt? And if so,
they're okay with it. So when a
government deleverages, it means that
the government's debt load compared to
the GDP of the country at taxes, that
ratio gets better, which means that
people like you and I pay the bill,
because all of the cost of that debt is
offloaded onto the economy through
inflation. Which is the third reason why
you don't want to be in bonds, because
they're going to pay you a negative
interest rate when you compare it to
real inflation. For the last 100 years,
the majority of the time, government
bonds pay a real negative interest rate.
And that's just using the official
inflation numbers. If you believe the
official inflation numbers are somewhat
understated, then even more of that time
you'd be getting an interest rate, a
yield on your money that is lower than
the rate of inflation. In other words,
you're losing purchasing power by
loaning your money to the government by
buying bonds. This means that with your
portfolio, you need to make sure you
have real savings that historically
preserve and slowly increase your
purchasing power. That way, when you
need dry powder, when you need to access
your emergency savings, when you want to
reallocate because there's assets on
sale, you are able to because you own
something that hasn't been eroded in its
purchasing power from the government. It
also means you have to take an active
role in your investing. You can't take a
passive role and just think, oh, the
indexes will take care of me over the
next decade or two. Passive investing
will give way to active investing again
just like it did from the 40s through
the 80s when active and value investing
took off. Is the people like Benjamin
Graham that trained Warren Buffett how
to invest. You need to know how to pick
and value stocks so that you know you're
buying them at a good price and you have
a high certainty that they will continue
to grow for you into the future. Now, if
you don't know how to do any of this, I
have created the perfect guide for you.
It is called the hedged hyperrowth
portfolio blueprint. It tells you
everything you need to know about how to
construct your portfolio in a way that
is built for the coming years and
decades, not the past. Right now, it's
on sale. It's linked in the description
below. I'm going to be doubling the
price soon, so get it now while you can.
As always, thanks so much for watching.
Have a great day.