The Federal Reserve is losing tens of
billions of dollars every single year.
And if you haven't seen it floating
around the internet lately, this is the
chart of how much money they used to
make. And this insane drop off a cliff
that looks like a penny stock or a
memecoin collapsing is the amount of
losses the Federal Reserve has sustained
since 2022, which was the last year they
actually turned a profit. But wait,
you're probably thinking, I thought the
Federal Reserve just printed all the
money they needed anyway. So, what does
it mean to have an entity like the
Federal Reserve have losses? Are there
any realworld consequences to this? And
is it ever going to turn around? First,
let's explain this chart that you're
looking at here. You can see after the
financial crisis, there was a certain
amount of money that the Federal Reserve
was consistently making. And in
September of 2022, that number turned
negative and it has plummeted lower
since. The key thing to understand about
this chart though is that everything
above zero, meaning profits for the
Federal Reserve, are weekly numbers, but
everything below zero, in other words,
losses, are cumulative numbers. Don't
ask me why they made the chart this way.
It is absolutely ridiculous to have a
prior time frame on the chart show a
weekly number and a later time frame on
the chart show a cumulative number. In
other words, all the losses total up
together. But that is what you're
looking at here. So, we need to change
this chart to get a more accurate
picture of what is actually going on.
And this here is a much more accurate
chart that compares apples to apples.
And it shows the amount of profit the
Federal Reserve generates by year and
how in 2023 and in 2024 that was a
negative number. In other words, a loss.
During 2023, the Federal Reserve lost
$114 billion. And during 2024, it
improved, but they still lost $77
billion. Now, if we go back to this
chart that shows the weekly amount
versus the right now cumulative amount
and we change the date so that the chart
ends in 20122, we can see more clearly
what this chart looked like when it was
positive. And what you are looking at
and why it was a weekly number before is
because of what the Federal Reserve does
with its profits and it pays them back
to the US government. But I'm getting
ahead of myself here. The first question
that we actually need to answer is how
does the Fed make money in the first
place when they're just the money
printer? Well, just like any bank, the
Fed has income and it has expenses. When
you go to your bank, you put money into
your bank account. They're going to pay
you hopefully an interest rate on those
deposits. Whether it's 01%, 2%, 3%,
whatever it is, they are paying you.
That is a cost for the bank. And in
turn, what they have to do is make money
somehow with the money that you loaned
to them because that's what a deposit
is. It's a loan to the bank. And so they
take your money and they loan it out to
somebody else for a higher interest
rate. Many times they take your dollars
and loan them out to the United States
government for four or 5%, but sometimes
they loan them out to individuals for
credit card debt or for auto loans or
for mortgages. And for the bank to be
profitable and to stay in business long
term, the amount that it makes from
lending out your money needs to be
greater than the amount that they pay to
you forgetting to borrow your money. The
Federal Reserve operates in much the
same way and you can see the amount of
money that they currently have loaned
out by looking at their balance sheet.
Yes, this represents assets that they
have purchased, but these assets are
debt instruments, which means they do
get paid back at some point. the assets
that they hold on their balance sheet
here are US treasuries and
mortgagebacked securities. And you can
see that ever since 2022, the amount of
assets the Fed has been holding on its
balance sheet has been declining. And
that is a result of some of that debt
getting paid back. Now, the difference
with the Federal Reserve is that when
they want to buy more assets, they just
create money out of thin air and then
they can go buy more debt assets. That
also means that when that debt is paid
back to the Federal Reserve, if they
don't take that money and loan it out
again, then that money just ceases to
exist. It just evaporates. It's gone.
So, all else being equal, when the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet goes
down, that represents money disappearing
from the system. Even so, they still
have over $6.5 trillion worth of assets
on their balance sheet. And that is $6.5
trillion worth of debt assets that are
currently paying the Federal Reserve
interest. You can see assets like the
10-year US Treasury are currently paying
4.2%. And so any of those bonds that the
Federal Reserve owns, they are currently
getting paid 4.2% on. Now, it is true
that the Federal Reserve does print up
money in order to buy up assets. But it
is also true that they also operate like
a regular bank in that they receive
deposits. It's just that they don't
receive deposits from people like you
and me. They receive deposits from
banks. The Federal Reserve is quite
literally the bank for banks. And in
return for taking those deposits, just
like a regular bank, the Federal Reserve
does pay interest to banks. This is
called the Federal Funds rate. And it is
the amount that banks get paid for
holding reserves overnight. So when
people talk about the Federal Reserve
raising or cutting interest rates, it's
specifically the Federal Funds rate that
they are talking about because that is
the one interest rate the Federal
Reserve actually controls. And you can
see how when the federal funds rate is
very high, that would incentivize banks
to keep their reserves with the Fed so
that they get a really high interest
rate risk-free. However, if the federal
funds rate is really low, let's say at
zero, then those banks need to make a
profit on their money. So, they're going
to push that capital out into the
private market, try and lend it to
individuals and businesses so that they
can have a positive return on their
money. So paying interest to banks is
one of the Federal Reserve's costs, but
they have other costs as well. In one of
the largest examples of government waste
and a misallocation of resources, the
Federal Reserve employs more than 500
researchers and more than 400 PhD
economists. In fact, they are the
largest employer of PhD economists there
is to do something that literally a
computer program could do and probably
even more effectively. And finally, the
Federal Reserve pays dividends to its
banks. So, we talked about how the
Federal Reserve makes income, and that
is from all of the interest they're
receiving on all of the $6.7 trillion
worth of assets that they hold. And we
also talked about the Federal Reserve's
expenses. They have to pay out interest
on reserves to banks. They have to
employ a bunch of people that are not
really doing anything. And they also
have to pay out dividends to their
banks. In normal environments for the
Federal Reserve, just like for a regular
bank, the income would exceed the
expenses. In other words, they would be
profitable. This is what we saw from
2011 all the way through 2022. And when
the Federal Reserve is profitable, in
other words, its income exceeds its
expenses. All of that profit goes back
to the government. It sends that cash
back to the US Treasury at the US
government. And that is why this chart
is called earnings remittances due to
the US Treasury. Just to give you an
example of the implications of how this
works. In an extreme example, let's say
that the United States government was
able to get its entire national debt
into the hands of the Federal Reserve.
Right now, the national debt is sitting
at a cool $36 trillion. And let's say
Congress gave the Federal Reserve a new
mandate that said you must buy up all of
the debt from the US Treasury around the
world. And the Federal Reserve's balance
sheet went from 6 trillion up to 42
trillion because they bought up all US
treasuries. Well, right now the US
government spends $1.2 trillion a year
on just the interest on the debt. So
that $1.2 trillion would go to the
Federal Reserve and most of it would get
sent right back to the government. In
other words, if the Fed were to monetize
the entire national debt, it would
become interestf free for the US
government, eliminating almost $1.2
trillion worth of expenses this year.
And every year that gets higher and
higher and higher, and that would just
cease to exist as a line item on the
budget for the US government. So, if
that's how the Federal Reserve's income
versus expenses work, and when they run
a profit, they send that back to the
government, why are they currently
losing money? And more importantly, why
are they losing so much money? Well, if
you take a look at this time frame,
which is when their balance sheet
exploded from March of 2020 through
about January of 2022, that's also the
period of time where interest rates were
pegged at zero, which means that those
trillions and trillions of dollars that
the Federal Reserve spent on buying up
US treasuries from the market, they're
currently all on their balance sheet and
they're all still paying very, very
little interest. And so, yes, the Fed
still does have $6.7 trillion worth of
assets on its balance sheet, but if
those assets are paying a total weighted
average of 2%, but they're currently
paying out 4% on reserves in addition to
all their other expenses, yeah, they're
going to be running some heavy losses.
And that's part of the reason why this
chart that shows their losses becomes
cumulative once it goes underneath zero
once it becomes negative because the
Federal Reserve actually keeps track of
this number. They send profits to the
Treasury, but if they run losses,
they're basically printing the
difference. In other words, they are
currently printing money to pay the
banks to keep that money out of
circulation. Which means that if they do
turn a profit again in the future, which
they probably will pretty soon, this
number will start heading back up again,
but they will not send any profits back
to the Treasury until they get back to
zero. In other words, they're going to
pay themselves back for the $77 billion
loss in 2024, $14 billion loss in 2023,
and any future losses they incur along
the way before they turn profitable
again. Now, you think, well, they were
just printing money to cover their
losses before, so why would they need to
pay themselves back once they turn
profitable? And it's because what I
showed you here when we were looking at
their balance sheet that any money paid
to the Federal Reserve that is not
loaned back out again into the open
market is essentially money getting
destroyed. It is ceasing to exist. But
while they are running losses, they are
simultaneously creating new dollars to
pay to the banks. And so once they turn
a profit again, they have to undo the
inflation, pay themselves back for all
that money that they printed into
existence in order to keep that game
going. Once they start turning a profit
again, they need to make sure they suck
all those dollars out of circulation
that they put into circulation, allowing
this total $225 billion of cumulative
losses to get back up to zero to destroy
$225 billion from the system. But the
question is, are they actually ever
going to turn profitable again? And the
answer is almost certainly yes. If we
take a look at their balance sheet, we
know the Federal Reserve is ending its
quantitative tightening. In other words,
their balance sheet is going to start
moving sideways at some point very soon
here. They have indicated that this is
going to be happening in many of their
recent FOMC meetings. The longer they
maintain a balance sheet somewhere in
the neighborhood of $6 trillion, the
more interest they start to earn on
those assets. Because if a one-year or a
2-year or a 5year bond gets paid off,
they will take that money and relo it
back out again in order to maintain
their $6.7 trillion balance sheet. If
they're not letting that balance sheet
drip down, but they're not increasing
it, they're just letting it stay steady.
All of the debt on their balance sheet
eventually rolls over. And it rolls over
at current interest rates, which means
all of the bonds that they had that were
paying 1 or 2% eventually get replaced
with bonds that are paying four or 5%.
At the same time, if they do move
interest rates any lower from here, that
means their expenses go down as well.
So, the longer time goes on, the lower
their expenses get and the higher their
income gets from their balance sheet.
Which means that yes, assuming things
continue to go the way they're going,
they will start turning a profit again.
And once they've paid themselves back
the current $225 billion of losses, and
in the future that will probably be
higher, then and only then will they
start taking their profits and paying
them back to the US government again.
And considering that the US government
is currently running $2 trillion
deficits, any amount of money paid back
to the government from the Federal
Reserve should help out with this
number, lightening the load on either
taxes or borrowing or both. At the end
of the day, this is just how the system
works. Whether you agree with it or not,
this is what is happening. We can talk
about the ways that it should be, but
the more helpful thing to do is talk
about the ways to survive and thrive in
the way the system really is. And the
fact that deficits have continued to get
worse for the last 25 years straight.
The cost of paying for the national debt
has started to go parabolic. And the
Federal Reserve has a history of bailing
out the US government by buying up a
bunch of its debt whenever there is a
crisis means that we are in for a longer
period of time with higher prices,
higher inflation, higher interest rates,
and we should invest accordingly. There
will be periods of time where interest
rates move down and prices move down,
but those are shorter term moves. In the
longer term, move higher, and you should
probably position your portfolio
accordingly. As always, thank you so
much for watching. Have a great day.