The plan to deregulate the banks that
I've been warning about for a while now
is finally here. Recently, the US
announced its plans to ease capital
rule, which limits banks treasury
trades. Because right now, banks have
what some would consider to be very
tight restrictions on how many US
treasuries they can purchase. In other
words, how much money they can loan to
the US government. And now US bank
regulators plan to reduce that key
capital buffer by up to 1 and a half
percentage points for the biggest
lenders. This rule is the enhanced
supplementary leverage ratio and it
applies to banks like Chase, Goldman
Sachs, and Morgan Stanley. It would take
the requirement down from the current 5%
to in between 3 and 1/2 and 4 1/2%. It
would also reduce the requirements of
the bank's subsidiaries to the same
range down from the current 6%. Now,
changes like this are not unprecedented.
We saw similar revisions back in 2018,
and we saw drastic changes taking these
requirements all the way down to 0% in
2020 and 2021. I'll talk about that more
in just a moment. But the question is,
why are they doing this now? Well, it's
because the federal government currently
owes $36 trillion in debt. And so far in
fiscal year 2025, just the interest
payments on the debt have accounted for
14% of all the money the US government
has spent in dollars. That has totaled
$665
billion. And keep in mind that is just
the net interest, not the total interest
payments on the debt. Total interest
payments on the national debt are
nearing $1.2 trillion annually. And
considering that the federal
government's total income from taxation
was under $5 trillion in 2024, it means
the US government is spending
approximately 25% of every dollar it
taxes from you just to pay interest on
the debt. Let me say that again. For
every dollar the US government takes in
taxes from your paycheck, 25% of that is
going just to pay interest on the debt.
Now, part of the reason for that is
because interest rates are so much
higher than they were just a few years
ago as a result of all of the crazy
borrowing and spending the government
has been doing. In fact, the last time
interest rates were this high were all
the way back in 2007 at a time when the
total national debt was under $9
trillion compared to today's 36
trillion. Now, we know that with US
treasuries, they are not an entirely
controlled market. There is influence
exerted on them by entities like the
Fed, but most Treasury buying and
selling happens from financial
institutions outside of the government's
control. And just like anything that has
buying and selling, the price is going
to be determined by that supply in
demand. This means that with interest
rates as high as they are, if the US
government wants those rates to come
down, they need more buyers of
treasuries to drive the price of
treasuries up, which pushes the rates
lower. This is the inverse of the chart
of something like TLT, which is an ETF
that invests in treasuries. You can see
that the price per share has fallen
because the demand for treasuries has
fallen. If more buyers come in to buy up
more treasuries, it would push the price
of treasuries back up, which would push
the interest rate or the yield back
down. So, one of the main things the US
government is trying to do right now in
order to help out its massive debt
burden or at least just the interest
payments on the debt is it's trying to
attract more dollars to be lent to the
US government in the form of buying US
treasuries. This is why regulators are
looking to lower the supplementary
leverage ratio so that banks can
purchase more treasuries considering the
capital requirements. easing these
restrictions simply makes it easier for
these banks to buy more treasuries. Now,
this is just step one. They will
probably continue to ease these
restrictions all the way down to zero
because at the end of the day, this is
just a band-aid. Tweaking how much a few
banks can purchase of US government debt
does not change how much the government
is borrowing, how much debt the
government already has, how much the
government is spending, and what the
deficit is every single year. All it
does is it temporarily makes all of
those other problems and issues a little
bit less painful in the short run. It's
like if you have a massive mortgage and
a home equity line of credit and you've
got huge loans on your cars and you've
maxed out your credit cards, it's not
going to help you in the long run to get
a little bit more debt in the form of
like a personal loan from a bank. It
might make things temporarily less
painful for you because you have a
little extra purchasing power that's not
just going to pay off all of your debt
or at least just the minimum payments,
but it's not going to help out your
situation in the long run just to have
somebody else who's willing to lend you
a little bit more money. In fact, it's
likely to just make things worse. Now, I
said that they are likely to take this
all the way down to zero. And even that
is not without precedent. Back in the
fallout of COVID, that is exactly what
regulators did. the supplementary
leverage ratio went all the way down to
0% which meant banks did not have to
worry about any of those capital
requirements and they could buy as many
US treasuries as they wanted. Problem
with that is that was when interest
rates on treasuries were basically at 0%
which means banks gorged themselves on
all of this US government debt that was
paying next to nothing. And we all know
what the fault of that was. When
interest rates inevitably rose after
that in order to compensate for the
inflation that happened from all the
money printing, banks were sitting on
hundreds of billions of dollars of
unrealized losses. Those treasuries that
they had bought when interest rates were
at rock bottom fell in value as interest
rates went up. So banks were sitting on
these treasuries that were worth a lot
less than what they paid for them, which
meant that the banks didn't actually
have enough money or enough reserves to
meet withdrawals if everybody wanted to
get their money back. Now, that's
exactly what happened. Some bank runs
started and some banks collapsed as a
result of not having the money because
the assets they were forced to sell in
order to meet all those withdrawal
requests were not worth as much as all
of the withdrawal requests. And so the
Federal Reserve stepped in and they
created something called the bank term
funding program. the BTFP, which
basically said, "Hey banks, if you've
got treasuries that are worth less than
what you paid for them, you can sell
them to us and we'll buy them from you
at full price. We'll pay for them what
you paid for them, even though that's
not what they're worth. The only
requirement is you have to buy those
treasuries back from us within a year."
Now, obviously, this meant that banks
were no longer sitting on real
unrealized losses because if you if you
and everybody else at the bank went to
go get your money out, that bank could
sell their treasuries to the Fed for
full price and you wouldn't have to be
worried about the bank collapsing, you
could actually get your money. And if
you know the bank can give you your
money, well, now there's no reason to
take it out anymore. So the BTFP worked,
but it essentially transformed bank
holdings of treasuries into reserves,
which is why changes to the
supplementary leverage ratios now do not
present the same sort of systemic issues
that it did last time. Because if banks
gorge themselves on a bunch of new US
treasuries at these current rates and
let's say interest rates continue to go
up from here, which they likely are to
continue to go up, and a bank run does
start at a certain bank, then the
Federal Reserve can always bring back
the BTFP. Now, this is a great reminder
that they don't have to bring back the
BTFP and they can let the bank fail. In
fact, when you go to the FDIC's website,
you can see this chart which shows how
many bank failures there are every
single year and how much in total assets
are lost from those bank failures every
single year. And you can see it is not
abnormal for a bank to just be allowed
to fail. Which means never hold more
than 250 grand at a bank. If you have
more than 250 grand in cash, split it up
between two banks. Split it up between
three banks. Put some of it in a
brokerage account. Buy tea bills with
it. You never want to be in a position
where if a bank goes under, you're going
to lose a significant amount of cash if
the Fed doesn't step in with a bailout
beyond the FDIC limits. Now, these
changes to the supplementary leverage
ratio, like I mentioned, are simply the
first step. This is one piece in a
coordinated attack in order to bring as
much money from the financial system
into the Treasury market as possible.
This paired with the recent stable coin
legislation, also paired with the recent
proposal to end the Federal Reserve's
interest payments to banks are all ways
the government is trying to redirect
financial institution money back into
the Treasury market. It's a band-aid,
but together it is a pretty big
band-aid. I've already made a video on
stable coins recently, and you can go
watch that now. And within one week of
this video posting, I'm also going to be
putting out a video on the recent
proposal to stop the Federal Reserve
from being able to pay interest on
reserves held at the Fed to banks. So
stay tuned for that. And finally, if you
don't know how to play this, you have to
understand that we are in a different
period of time than we were for the last
40 years. We are now in a bond bare
market, not a bond bull market. We are
going through an inflationary
deleveraging now from the government
standpoint. Whereas the last 40 years
were a disinflationary levering up from
the government standpoint. We are in a
different phase of the long-term debt
cycle, which means your investments
should be playing by different rules.
You need to be hedged from downside
volatility. You need to be protected
against inflation and erosion of the
purchasing power of the dollar. And you
need to be exposed to asset price
meltups. If you don't know how to do any
of that, I have created the perfect
guide for you. It's called the hedged
hyperrowth portfolio blueprint. It is
linked for you in the description below.
It's the lowest price it'll ever be. I
am doubling the price very soon, so get
it now while you can. As always, thank
you so much for watching.