Is right now the worst time ever to buy
a home in the United States? Well, first
let's take a look at what the data says
and then I'll share with you my opinion.
First, let's take a look at this chart,
which is the home purchase sentiment
index. This goes back to 2011. And as
you can see, sentiment at that time was
at rock bottom. In other words, during
2011, most people thought it was the
absolute worst time to buy a home. Now,
if you remember anything about the years
2010, 11, 12, possibly one of the best
times maybe in history to buy a home in
the United States. So, clearly most
people were wrong about the housing
market then, which makes sense right off
the backs of a housing crash, a
recession, the great financial crisis.
Most people would think, ah, probably
shouldn't buy something that just lost
everybody a ton of money. Turns out
though that was a contrarian indicator
at the time. But is this sentiment index
always a contrarian indicator? Well,
let's fast forward to the peak of this
index which happened in 2019 when most
people more than at any other time since
this data was recorded thought it was a
great time to buy a house in the United
States. Truth is 2019 was actually a
great time to buy a house in the United
States. And all we have to do is take a
look at the median sale price of houses
sold in the United States. Verify that
these were indeed good times to buy
homes. And by the way, we are looking at
a chart of the median home sale price,
not the mean or the average because
median is the middle one. So it's not
going to get skewed by some of the house
prices that are, you know, 10 million,
$20 million, whereas the average will.
So median is going to represent more of
a typical reality across the nation for
most people. We're also looking at sale
prices. We're not looking at prices that
homes were listed for sale. We're just
looking at actual transactions that took
place. So you can see right here 2011
when most people thought it was the
worst time to buy, was one of the best
times to buy because home prices
skyrocketed from there. We can also see
2019 where most people thought it was a
great time to buy. Well, they were
right. Home prices skyrocketed from
there. Now, if we take a look at 2022,
we can see the home purchase sentiment
index. People thought it was again a
terrible time to buy. And the median
sale price on average from the peak in
2022 has come down a bit, but mostly
since the beginning of 2022, it's been
volatile and moved sideways, which means
that this sentiment index in 2022 did
not provide either a contrarian signal
or a correct signal because home prices
have basically just moved sideways since
then. And where we're sitting now is
historically low in terms of more people
than on average for the last 15 years
think that it's a bad time to buy a
house right now than they have for the
last 15 years. But it's definitely not
at rock bottom lows like it was in 22
2023 and prior to 2012. Now part of the
reason why this index has gone up
recently and there are more people that
think it's a good time to buy is because
of expectations of rate cuts. If you
think mortgage rates are going to go
down in the future, more people are
going to want to buy now so they can
lock in the price of the home and then
refinance their mortgage later. We will
see whether or not it actually turns out
to be that way because just cuz the Fed
cuts rates doesn't mean mortgage rates
will follow. But that's part of the
reason why this index has improved
recently. But obviously there are still
a lot of people scared that we are going
to see something like 2007 through 2009
where home prices just collapse.
Especially when you start seeing charts
like this one which is from creative
planning that shows the affordability
gap between what income you need to buy
a house right now versus what income
most people have is at an extreme level
way more than it was prior to the
financial crisis. This blue line down
here, right under $80,000, represents
the actual median income in America
right now. However, the orange line at
the top represents the amount of income
that you would need in order to qualify
for a mortgage on the median home in the
America right now. In other words, the
typical person in America makes $80,000
right now. But to be able to afford the
typical home, they would need to make
over $120,000,
which far fewer people actually do. And
so this affordability gap is one of the
reasons why people expect that the gap
has to close, and it will do so by
prices coming down. This next chart from
Reenture is another one people look at
that gives them a bearish view on the
housing market. The orange line on top
represents the current median. This
orange line on top represents the
current mortgage payment necessary to
purchase the median home in America,
sitting at about $2,700 per month.
Whereas the blue line is the median cost
to rent in the United States, sitting at
just about $2,000, over $700 difference.
And you can see the last time a gap this
large appeared between mortgage costs
and rent costs was right before the
great financial crisis. Okay, so it is
clear from these charts that most people
cannot afford to purchase a home right
now. But what are the counterpoints to
this? Is there any way that this doesn't
definitely lead to a housing crash?
There is one glaring piece of missing
information that we have not touched on
yet and that is existing homeowners.
When we look at the actual income that
the median person in the US has versus
the income you need to buy a home again
that's for somebody who is looking to
purchase a home today. This is not
talking about what the person who bought
a home 2 years ago, 5 years ago, 10
years ago is currently paying compared
to their income. This is just new
buyers. Similarly, when you're looking
at the cost to rent versus the mortgage
cost, this is for new buyers. The
mortgage cost of somebody who bought in
2019, let's say, and never refinanced
when rates dropped would still be
sitting on a $1,400 per month payment,
well below what it currently costs to
rent. This means that it is possible
there are a lot of homeowners with
mortgage rates that are locked in way
lower than the current cost of a new
mortgage or even the cost to rent. So,
we know that it is possible, but is
there any data to support that this
might be true? That there are a lot of
homeowners out there who actually
couldn't afford to sell because their
bills would go up too high, so they're
locked into holding on to their current
home. Good question. I'm glad you asked.
Turns out that the share of homeowners
who don't have a mortgage rose to 40% in
2023, which means that is more than 30
million homeowners who don't have a
mortgage. Now, this stat is about 2
years old. So, it's possible many of
those people have now pulled a mortgage
out on their property. But given the
fact that over the last 2 years interest
rates have gone up and these were people
who didn't have a mortgage before, it
would be reasonable to assume that the
number of people who were mortgage free
in 2023 that are now no longer mortgage
free because they pulled out a
highinterest loan on their property is
fairly low because the only reason you
do that is because of financial stress.
So it may not be quite 40% anymore who
are mortgage free, but it is certainly
still a significant number of homeowners
who have no mortgage. Further than that,
nearly half of mortgaged residences as
of quarter 1 this year, 2025, are equity
rich, meaning that they owe less on the
house than half the home's value. The
average equity in a home right now
across the United States is $300,000.
And almost 200,000 of that is tappable,
which means that it can be withdrawn
while still maintaining a 20% stake in
the home. This means that anybody who
purchased a home in the United States
right now prior to, we can say 2022,
let's even say 2021, is sitting on a
bunch of equity right now, a comfortable
cushion of equity, and they are sitting
on a monthly payment that is lower than
what they would have to pay if they sold
and moved somewhere else, whether they
rent or buy. This means that homeowners
right now across the board are in no
hurry to sell and they don't care how
long they have to sit on their house. If
they want to sell, they will let it sit
until they get the price they want. Very
few distressed sellers because they're
in no hurry to go out and pay more for
the same house. This has led to a very
peculiar situation that has never
happened in the history of this data
being collected in which existing home
sales are now higher than new home
sales. If you take a look at this chart
from Reventure, you can see the median
sale price of an existing home right now
is $435,000,
but the median sale price of a new home
is only $42,000.
That's right. for homes that are
existing already that are selling. They
are selling for more than brand new
homes that are straight off the conveyor
belt, never been lived in before, never
been touched. And if you see, other than
a very, very brief and slight crossover
in 2006, this has never happened before,
especially to the extent that it's
happening right now. This is further
evidence that people who own a home
right now, especially people who have
bought before a couple of years ago are
in no hurry and have really no desire to
sell unless they can get a price that
they want. They're sitting on their
homes. That supply is tanking because
they just don't care to sell, especially
considering mortgage costs are way up
and renting costs are way up from the
point at which they bought. However,
there is a group of people that
continually wants to sell homes, and
that is the companies that build those
homes. Home builders are not sitting on
really cheap mortgages. Home builders
are not sitting on homes that they
bought for a lot less. Home builders are
in the business of building a home and
then selling it as quickly as possible.
Which means for the majority of people
looking to buy a home right now, you are
very likely to get a better deal by
going to a brand new home that's just
been built rather than trying to buy it
from somebody who bought it 10 years ago
and is sitting on a 3% mortgage and a
$1,200 house payment. And just in case
you think this is a negative sign for
home builders, this is actually a very
positive sign for home builders because
they are becoming more and more of the
only source of new homes on the market.
This is one of the reasons why Warren
Buffett just invested nearly a billion
dollars in home building companies. If
you look at LAR symbol LEN, you can see
its performance has started to recover
recently, especially on the news that
Warren Buffett had invested a bunch of
money. And also Dr. Horton has recovered
healthily recently, especially on the
news that Warren Buffett invested a
bunch of money. Now, when Warren Buffett
does something, usually it's important
to pay attention. If demographics in the
United States were sitting in a place
where it was very clear there was about
to be a big housing crash, do you think
Warren Buffett would have just plowed a
billion dollars into new homebuilders?
Probably not. But what do I mean by
demographics? This chart shows the
average number of people who have lived
in a household going back to 1900. You
can see 125 years ago, the average
number of people who lived in a house
was 4 and a half. And these houses were
small. You've seen houses that were
built in 1900. They're the size of most
living rooms today. They had a couple of
bedrooms and each bedroom had a couple
of people in it. However, the average
number of people living in each
household has steadily declined for over
a hundred years now. Today, that number
is about two and a half. This is
important to keep in mind because it is
a stat most people conveniently ignore
when they're predicting housing market
crashes. A lot of people like to look at
the total population. A lot of people
like to look at the total number of
housing units that are being built. Both
of those are important. It's also though
important to consider that today there
are far fewer people who live in each
housing unit than there used to be. So
the housing units per population doesn't
exactly mean what it used to. Even if
the housing units per population stat
stayed exactly the same, you would still
have a worsening situation because
there's less people living in each of
those housing units, which means for
that fact alone, you need more housing
units per population just to stay even.
And yet when we look at housing
inventory compared to the population
level, you can see that it has not
increased. It has not stayed the same.
It has dropped for over 25 years because
of the overabundance of building that
took place prior to the financial
crisis. Builders got crushed due to
extra regulations, zoning laws, money
printing, and a host of other problems.
Home building has never recovered. With
a declining housing inventory compared
to the population with an increasing
number of housing units needed per
population, it is very simple. There are
still way more people who want and need
a place to live than there are places to
live. Which is why you see trends like
this that ever since the financial
crisis, the number of young adults
living at home has been on the rise.
This is pent up silent waiting demand.
What do you think will happen if
mortgage rates drop? Heck, what do you
think will happen if prices drop to a
slightly more affordable level? There
are millions of people on the sidelines
waiting, hoping someday they'll be able
to buy a home. And yet, because of
demographics and regulations, that seems
to be less and less of a possibility. In
my opinion, this is not advice, in my
opinion, you need to be in the real
estate game somehow. You want to copy
Warren Buffett and just ride his
coattails and buy some homebuilders like
Lonar and Dr. Horton, fine. You want to
buy some REITs, great. You want to buy a
rental property. As long as it cash
flows, it's in a good area, you've got a
good property manager, it's profitable
after things like maintenance, and you
can afford the mortgage on it. If you
lose a tenant, that's great. Those deals
are available, and you don't have to
look in your city. Look across the
nation. There are plenty of cities
across the nation that are still
fantastic places to buy rental
properties. You want to buy a personal
residence? Fine. Make sure that you are
doing a fixed rate mortgage only, no
ARMS, no variable interest rate loans.
Make sure you can absolutely afford that
payment even if something negative
happens to your income. And yeah, right
now you are going to be paying a lot
more to get a mortgage than you would if
you rent. But I want you to look at that
chart one more time. Ignore the mortgage
line and just look at the cost to rent
line. This goes back to the '9s. Has
this line ever gone down? No. And that's
the problem. Yes. Right now, you are
locking in a higher cost for a mortgage
than you could if you just rented right
now. But every year, that cost to rent
climbs because this is a demographics
issue. This is not a bubble. This is not
euphoria. People aren't buying three and
four homes and hoping that they can sell
them and flip them a year later for
twice the price. This is more people
need a place to live than there are
places to live, which is why the cost to
rent continues to climb every year,
which means you need to get into the
real estate game somehow. Again, even if
it's just buying some real estate
stocks, you're getting into the game
because if you don't, it's possible that
like many people, you might get to the
point where you're locked out and you
can never break back in. Definitely
don't do anything risky. Definitely
don't extend yourself beyond your means.
But in my opinion, it is also risky to
not get in the game at all because this
blue line of cost to rent will continue
going up and you won't be able to do
anything about it. But above all, do
your own research, make your own
decisions, understand that your market
is different than every other market.
And thank you so much for watching. Hope
you have a great day.