Whenever a bureaucrat, whenever a
politician starts talking about wanting
to deregulate something, remove laws,
and decrease government power, it should
set your spidey senses off. It's a red
flag because to the government, there is
nothing more important than being able
to govern more. And just a few days ago,
Steven Moran, who is one of the new
governors at the Federal Reserve
appointed by Trump, spoke on the topic
of regulatory dominance of the Federal
Reserve's balance sheet, specifically
talking about why they need to
deregulate the banking sector. And the
question you should be asking yourself
is why? And maybe even more importantly,
how is this going to get the government
what they want? Because that is the true
goal here. Just for some brief context
in case you're new here, this is a chart
of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
You can think of this like their
brokerage account. It contains all of
the assets that they have purchased over
the years, which are primarily US
government treasury bonds and
mortgagebacked securities. So, let's go
through a couple of the things that he
said. You can read this on the Federal
Reserve's website yourself in full if
you would like, and I will show you why
this all has to do with stealth QE. This
is about the government being able to
borrow an infinite amount of money
without having to tap on the Federal
Reserve. Moran says the Federal Reserve
is actively revising its banking
regulations, which is a project I
strongly support. For many years,
financial regulation mostly moved in one
direction, increasingly restricting the
banking sector. This led to adverse
consequences and lots of headscratching
as to their causes. In some respects,
regulations that were enacted to shore
up financial stability have actually
constrained the Fed's control over some
elements of monetary policy transmission
and the size of the balance sheet. In
plain English, he's saying here,
regulations on the banking industry have
just ratcheted tighter and tighter over
the years. Anytime a problem has come
up, it has been dealt with with more
regulation rather than less. And one of
the consequences downstream of this is
that the Federal Reserve has had trouble
controlling monetary policy, the thing
it's supposed to be doing. Regulatory
dominance of the balance sheet must be
considered to ensure the Fed has
autonomy over conducting monetary
policy. He says that while discussions
about bank reserve balances and interest
paid on reserves and the composition of
the balance sheet and treasury market
intermediation are flourishing, I
believe that many of these conversations
are downstream of the bank regulatory
framework. In other words, a lot of the
things that we've talked about on this
channel he thinks are secondary. For
example, bank reserve balances. How much
is enough for banks to have in reserves?
Just a couple of years ago, when you
considered actual bank reserves plus
reverse repo balances, bank reserves in
total were around $5 trillion. Today,
because the reverse repo facility has
been drained, bank reserves at are
around $3 trillion. This is something
the Fed has done intentionally and talks
about how they like bank reserves right
now being around $3 trillion. He says
that is a secondary issue. He also talks
about interest being paid on reserves
because banks when they have bank
reserves they hold them at the federal
reserve they get paid interest on them
and the interest they get paid is equal
to the federal funds rate. This is the
tool the Fed uses today to make sure the
Fed funds rate stays between their
target range. They pay interest on
reserves held overnight at the Fed to
banks. This means that banks when they
hold their reserves at the Fed, they get
a riskfree payment from the money
printer themselves on those reserves. If
interest rates are high, this sucks
liquidity out of circulation and ensures
that that money is not being lent out
into the economy to be used for
production. It keeps all that capital
isolated. This is on purpose when the
Fed is trying to stop inflation. When
they lower interest rates, it encourages
banks to go put that capital to
productive use. Now, I've talked on this
channel in the past about how we may see
interest on reserve balances either
eliminated or at least reduced. There
was a bill introduced into Congress to
rewrite the Federal Reserve Act or just
amend it so that the Fed could not pay
interest on reserves. Historically, this
is something they never did until the
financial crisis. This is why when you
look at the chart that shows the total
amount of reserves that banks are
holding at the Federal Reserve, it's
basically nothing until the financial
crisis. And now there's over $3 trillion
getting paid risk-f free in interest by
the Fed to banks. Now, Congress, when
they were considering getting rid of the
Fed's ability to pay interest on these
reserves, were thinking, hey, that's $3
trillion that would be freed up and
would go into the Treasury market. But
as we see the Federal Reserve, its
leadership is being reshaped right now.
We had Cougler step down. Bostic just
announced his retirement. Powell is
being replaced next year. The Lisa Cook
thing is still up in the air. But the
leadership there is being changed with
Steven Moran now in a position at the
Federal Reserve and constantly doing
things like talking publicly about his
rationale and his reasoning for things
like interest rate cuts and today's
topic, the balance sheet and bank
regulation. It seems clear that policy
from the Fed is moving in a different
direction and we could even see interest
on overnight reserve balances at the Fed
reduced just because the Fed chooses to
do that without any act of Congress
simply because the leadership there has
changed. But going back to what Moran is
speaking about, he says that all those
things are secondary discussions. Even
the composition of the balance sheet
being made up of less mortgage back
securities and more treasuries, which is
something they're actively doing,
selling mortgage back securities, buying
more treasuries. This adds liquidity to
the overall markets. But he says all of
these things are secondary to bank
regulatory framework. In other words, if
we have one change to banking
regulation, that will be upstream and it
will cause a snowball effect. And in his
opinion, what he's saying, it will
improve all these other things that we
may not even have to touch. Speaking
about increasing regulations, he says,
"Far too often, adverse spillovers are
recognized only after the fact. And the
answer to a poorly functioning
regulation is the band-aid approach of
layering on another regulation." This is
true because there's nothing the
government likes more than fixing a
problem it caused in the first place,
and the solution is always more of
itself. He goes on to say that the costs
and benefits of a regulation on a
community bank are rarely comparable to
those of the same regulation on a
systemically important bank but heavily
impact the credit available to main
street businesses where local knowledge
is critical. Now this is true
regulations impact small banks way more
than they do large banks. But this is
not something that is just true in
banking. This is something that is true
of laws and regulations in general. If
you've ever tried to open up a local
business and you have multiple
government departments and agencies
coming in and telling you that you need
to change things about where the drain
is located in which direction the door
opens between the front and the back,
the size of the windows for air flow,
the distance of electrical outlets from
the floor, and any other of literally
thousands of different regulations, and
see how they are often times
contradictory to each other. It doesn't
matter. And guess what? It's not the
little small momand- pop businesses that
can figure these things out and that can
fight them. It's Starbucks. It's
McDonald's. It's Chipotle. And the
bigger secret is that often times it is
these large corporations who are
lobbying for more rules because they
know what those rules are going to be
and they know they can absorb the cost
and they can navigate them easily. And
yet it's going to put the small
businesses out of business which
eliminates their competition. Big
business is pro- regulation. Big
business is for big government. It helps
them by eliminating competition many
times from players who are smaller,
faster, more agile, have more loyal
customers and in a completely free
market would out compete them. So it's
not just banks. That's how just business
versus government works. He talks about
how regulators went too far after the
2008 financial crisis and they created
many rules that raised the cost of
credit and limited its availability
without reducing risk in a compensatory
fashion. Compensatory compensatory
compensatory I don't know how to say
that word. The signs of this overreach
are clear. Many traditional banking
activities have migrated away from the
regulated banking sector partly because
burdensome rules have made provision of
these services too costly or otherwise
difficult for banks to provide. This is
the reason why the shadow banking system
exists. This is the reason why private
credit markets exist. It is because
these free market activities still have
demand. There's still customers out
there that need to or want to
participate here and somebody wants to
come along and profit from being the
supplier there. But laws come in and
suppress that activity over here, which
just pushes it out into the edges where
it's done much worse. It pushes it into
the black market or the gray market
where it's performed by shady characters
or done outright illegally. And those
problems are the result of suppressing
and overregulating it, not the result of
the free market. He also says that the
Federal Reserve should aim for the
smallest footprint it can manage. This
means limiting distortions to the
provision of credit in the economy, for
instance, through large-scale asset
purchases. It also means sticking to our
clear statutory mandate and not coloring
outside the lines. and we have recently
taken steps in these directions.
Basically, he's saying monetary policy
needs to stick to what monetary policy
is supposed to be doing and we shouldn't
be going outside the lines there doing
things like just buying assets,
distorting credit markets. One example
that he gives for going in the correct
direction here is that they announced
that maturing agency mortgage back
securities are going to be replaced with
treasury bills in the Fed's portfolio.
This is what I talked about earlier in
the video. The Fed's balance sheet
starting December 1st will remain the
same size. No more QT, not yet. QE, same
size, but they're still letting the
mortgage back securities bleed off.
They're replacing that with Treasury
bills. He's saying this is a step in the
right direction because you read between
the lines. The Fed has no business
owning mortgage backed securities. He
also says the board voted to rescend the
Fed's climate guidance. And beyond that,
there is more work needed to be done in
reorienting the Fed's activities to
properly heed our narrow statutory
mandate. Okay, so putting this all
together, he's saying a couple of things
in summary. Number one, the Fed for far
too long has been doing far too much.
Monetary policy has expanded beyond the
role that it should be. And number two,
banking regulation has gone too far and
it has expanded be far beyond the role
that it should. These two things are
connected. And as you'll see, what he's
saying here is the Fed needs to take a
backseat for things like QE. And as
you'll see, what he's putting together
here is that he thinks the Fed should be
taking a back seat with things like QE.
And that if we lift restrictions off of
banks, they will take over that role.
And here's why. He's talking here about
the fact that they've been shrinking
their balance sheet for quantitative
tightening. And now they've decided to
end those reductions because they say
that reserve balances are now ample.
Remember this chart? This is bank
reserves. They're saying now we finish
QT $3 trillion is ample. Not the balance
sheet. The balance sheet is different.
This is bank reserves. Reserves that
banks are holding at the Fed. And after
all the QT that they've done with this
chart, their balance sheet that has
drained reserves in the system to a
place that the Fed likes. But he
questions what determines whether
reserves are ample or not. Before the
GFC, reserve levels were much lower or
scarce. Even just a few months ago,
reserves were higher or abundant. He
says that we can look at money market
movements to assess whether conditions
are shifting from one regime to another.
But he says to me, this ignores first
principles because liquidity
requirements themselves are what is
forcing banks to hold high-quality
liquid assets including reserves.
Meanwhile, capital requirements such as
the enhanced supplementary leverage
ratio and global systemically important
bank sir charges impose costs to hold
those assets. When these banks, many of
which are primary dealers of the US
Treasury securities, attempt to get that
new government debt from auctions to
investors, they navigate a regulatory
patchwork of contradictory incentives.
Just like the person who's trying to
open up a coffee shop, and one
government agency comes in and says,
"Your door needs to swing from in to
out." The next government agency says
the door needs to swing from out to in.
And by the way, the drain that you have
is the wrong size. And then the third
one comes in and says that drain is
actually the right size, but it's in the
wrong place. That's what banks are
navigating every day. Now, I'm not
saying I feel sorry for them, but it is
true there is a very complicated
patchwork of regulations that is making
the financial system overly burdensome
and causes unexpected problems to keep
on popping out at unexpected times and
in unexpected places. He talked about
how supervisory policy can also boost
demand for reserves. Fears of heightened
scrutiny or supervised reaction can
raise demand for bank reserves above and
beyond what's required. For all the talk
about fiscal dominance of monetary
policy, the reality is that the size of
the balance sheet is a result of
regulatory dominance. Fiscal dominance,
just so you're aware, is referring to
what the government does with taxes and
spending. So, if you've heard about
fiscal dominance, that's saying that the
government is taxing so much and
spending so much and running such large
deficits that that is the overwhelming
force in financial markets right now. It
overwhelms what the Federal Reserve does
with their monetary policy, their
interest rates, their balance sheet. But
he says that in reality what we are
facing is regulatory dominance. That the
regulations over the financial system
are impacting it way more than either
fiscal or monetary policy. Regulations
boost demand for reserves which in turn
requires us to end runoff or purchase
securities for reserve management
purposes. These actions may affect
financial conditions and create
crossurrens with monetary policy goals.
The Fed no longer targets monetary
aggregates like reserve levels. But that
doesn't mean we should not think about
them. In other words, regulations cause
banks to have to do things that then
causes the Fed to have to do things that
may be at odds with its intended
monetary policy. One of these is the
consequence that the Fed's large balance
sheet pays significant payments of
interest to the banking sector. This is
what we talked about earlier. The $3
trillion of reserves that sits at the
Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve
pays interest on those. He says this is
a little different for banks income than
if they held treasuries directly as
would occur in a scarce reserves regime.
In fact, an upward sloping yield curve
would suggest that banks would earn even
more from holding treasuries rather than
reserves. He is saying if banks no
longer hold reserves at the Fed and
instead they're holding treasuries, they
might actually have more income right
now. Regardless, the optics differ.
large interest on reserve balances may
appear like the Fed is unfairly
subsidizing the banking system with
billions of dollars. Even if that's not
the case, again, this is what we
mentioned earlier. The Fed pays banks
interest on those reserves, which keeps
those reserves at the Fed, and it's
risk-free. Just these perceptions alone
can affect the Fed's credibility and
thus its effectiveness. Several times
now, the Senate has debated whether the
Fed ought to be stripped of its
statutory authority to pay interest on
reserve balances despite its necessity
as a tool for managing the federal funds
rate. Again, we talked about this
earlier. Bill went to the Senate where
they were saying, "Hey, maybe we should
just cut off their ability to do this.
That would free up $3 trillion for
treasuries." And that's why trying to
settle the ongoing debates about how
monetary policy is best implemented
before settling the regulatory framework
is putting the cart before the horse.
Because of regulatory dominance,
regulations will determine the right
size of the balance sheet and the role
for interest on reserve balances. And
this is where he starts to get to the
meat, get to the point. Moving to
leverage ratios. The leverage ratio
should not be the binding constraint on
banks in the ordinary course of managing
their balance sheets, incentivizing
high-risisk behavior for no good reason.
But I also believe that penalizing
holdings of treasuries and reserves
through leverage ratios is at odds with
requiring banks to hold those
instruments as highquality liquid assets
to cover potential outflows. In
addition, dealer intermediation of the
treasury market can suffer if banks are
forced to hold substantial capital just
to support their treasury and repo
trading books, which are often low
return, low risk, high volume
activities. Removing these securities
from the leverage ratio, as was
suggested as an alternative in the
proposed rule, would help insulate the
Treasury market from stressful episodes
when liquidity is in short supply. He
goes on to say that this is not a new
idea. The banking regulators excluded
treasuries and reserves from the
leverage ratio denominator in response
to the increase in bank deposits during
and after 2020 and 2021. The only
observable downside from that
intervention came from the transition
back to including them in the
denominator. Banks then shunned deposits
to avoid pushing against their leverage
ratios, helping lead to a flood of cash
into money market funds and the
exorbitant rise in the usage of the
overnight reverse repo facility, in turn
limiting the extent to which
quantitative tightening drained reserves
for several years. Bank and depositor
behavior were unnecessarily distorted.
As interest rates rose in 22 and 23,
some banks had to reverse course and
compete for deposits, whipsawing banking
behavior that should otherwise have been
relatively stable. In other words, he's
saying, "Hey, we've already made this
change temporarily in response to a
financial crisis, and it was fine. In
fact, the problems came when we
reinstituted the rules. It created large
swings in liquidity in the markets
between trying to get rid of deposits
and then scrambling for them. He goes on
to say that the optimal level of
reserves may drop below where it is now,
at least relative to GDP or the size of
the banking system. It's possible that
in the future it may be appropriate to
resume shrinking the balance sheet yet
again, and that stopping runoff today
does not necessarily mean stopping it
forever. It would also enable them to
reduce interest payments on reserves.
And if we go far enough with removing
regulations, we may be able to limit
perceptions that the Fed is picking
winners and losers through regulations,
asset purchases, and credit allocation
decisions. Moran is new to the Federal
Reserve, but he is already making waves.
We already know that we have more
changes coming to the leadership at the
Federal Reserve. And we also know that
currently the path we're going on with
how much the Treasury is borrowing, it
is on a dead-end path speeding towards a
brick wall called deflationary death
spiral. In other words, there's not
enough money for them to suck out of the
system. That has to come from somewhere.
It's either going to come from the
Federal Reserve resuming quantitative
easing, which would be extremely
unpopular given the amount of optics and
people looking at the Federal Reserve
now. But a few tweaks to the banking
system made by the Treasury and the
Federal Reserve would allow banks to do
that for the Federal Reserve.
Eliminating treasuries from leverage
ratios means that banks could step in
and buy as many treasuries as they want.
Looking at treasuries as fungeible with
reserves would allow banks to loan that
money to the US government without risk.
And if something like Silicon Valley
Bank happens again where banks have a
bunch of treasuries that are at an
unrealized loss and they see an outflow
of withdrawals and they cannot sell
those treasuries at a high enough price
to meet those withdrawals. The Federal
Reserve already has a system in place to
deal with that. It's called the BTFP,
the bank term funding program, which
allows banks to temporarily sell
treasuries at full price to the Fed as
long as they buy them back later.
Because of this implicit bailout, it
turns treasuries into reserves for
banks, at least functionally, because
there's no scenario in which they cannot
redeem them. With that backs stop in
place from a regulation perspective,
there's no reason why treasuries can't
be treated as reserves. Loosening the
shackles of the banking industry in this
way would allow a flood of trillions of
dollars from all banks to flow into the
Treasury market, helping interest rates
go lower, keeping the government
spending machine alive and well for
longer. And most importantly, it would
allow the Federal Reserve to take a back
seat and not look like they're the ones
printing the money this time. And if
you've hung in here to the very end and
it still doesn't make any sense, all you
need to know is that more money printing
is coming. It's going to be spent into
existence by the government. It's just
going to be done through the banks
instead of by the Fed. At least if Moran
has his way. As always, thank you so
much for watching. Have a great day.