The reverse repo facility at the Federal
Reserve is finally empty. After a $2.5
trillion spike in balances held at the
reverse repo facility at the Fed, the
total balances have finally dwindled
down basically to zero. Balances will
continue to bounce around a little bit.
As you can see, as of Wednesday, August
20th, it was about 35 billion. But
zooming out, you can see it's well under
where it's been for the last couple of
years and back down to normal levels
again. And that $2.5 trillion that was
in there at the peak in 2022 has now
gone back into the financial system. The
dollars that have been sitting in this
facility have been providing the excess
liquidity specifically for the US
government's insatiable appetite for
borrowing for the last couple of years.
Now that this facility is drained, the
question is where will the liquidity
come from now? Because the government is
not stopping its borrowing. In fact,
it's not even slowing down, it's
speeding up. As a recap, the Federal
Reserve used the reverse repo facility
as a way to absorb the excess cash
deposits that flooded the banking system
after all the money printing during
2020. Because cash deposits are a
liability for banks, they need to go get
assets to offset those liabilities. But
the Fed through its rounds of QE had
just bought up all of the assets off the
market, which meant that banks were
having a very tough time finding
collateral. So the Federal Reserve
opened up the reverse repo facility and
said, "Hey banks, park your cash here.
We'll give you a nice interest rate and
in return for that cash, we'll
temporarily give you the collateral, the
assets that you need." It was a sweet
deal for banks because they were getting
literally risk-free money from the
Federal Reserve by parking their cash
here. But as inflation rose, interest
rates rose, and government borrowing
kept on increasing, the interest rates
on tea bills slowly but surely got
higher than the interest rate that was
getting paid in the reverse repo
facility. Which meant starting in 2023,
you saw money start to slowly leave the
reverse repo facility because it was
finding better deals just lending to the
US government. Again, this is all
short-term cash. This is stuff like
money market funds. It wants a place
where it's going to be easily
accessible. I can get the cash out very
soon. Going to get the highest interest
rate possible and the lowest risk of
default. And so the US government has
been able to borrow essentially as much
as it wants as long as it's issuing T
bills, very short-term debt because it
was just relying on the trillions of
dollars that was leaving the reverse
repo facility to get T bills instead.
But now there's nothing left in the
reverse repo facility. We're back to the
situation that we were prior to all of
the money printing in 2020. The problem
is by the end of September, the Treasury
is borrowing another trillion dollars.
And by the end of the year, they're
tacking on another 600 billion on top of
that. And because President Trump has
been adamant doing everything he
possibly can to try and get the Federal
Reserve to lower rates, he's not rolling
that debt over or borrowing long-term
debt. He has committed to only issuing
short-term debt. That way, once interest
rates do go down, he can roll out that
short-term debt over into lower
interest, cheaper debt. But where is the
$1.5 trillion going to come from for all
this short-term debt? Well, the first
place that liquidity might come from is
from the Genius Act. One reason why this
administration has been so pro crypto is
because it wants to ensure that at the
foundation of all of that is treasuries.
In other words, dollars being lent to
the US government. More dollars being
lent to them, the cheaper their
borrowing is. That is the reason for the
Genius Act and this administration being
so pro crypto. but it's not enough. The
second place we can look is a bill that
was recently introduced to Congress
called the FAR act, the Fiscal
Accountability for Interest on Reserves
Act. I don't know why they always have
to make it a stupid acronym, but
basically this bill proposes eliminating
the ability of the Federal Reserve to
pay interest on reserve balances that
are held at the Fed. Right now, banks
hold a total of $3.3 trillion in
reserves at the Federal Reserve. And you
can see that prior to 2008, banks did
not hold reserves at the Fed. So what in
the world changed that caused so many
trillions of dollars to just go sit at
the Fed? Well, the Federal Reserve got
the authorization from Congress to start
paying interest on reserves. So just
like the reverse repo facility, if you
are a bank sitting on cash, you're like,
"Hey, what are we going to do with all
these reserves?" give them to the Fed
and the Fed pays you interest. Now, the
reason this rule was changed in 2008 so
the Fed could start paying interest on
reserves held there was because of all
the QE. They wanted an easier way to be
able to make sure that the Federal Funds
rate stayed within the range that they
wanted. Prior to 2008, the way the
Federal Reserve would make sure the
Federal Funds rate stayed in between
their target range was strictly through
open market operations. And so the
Federal Reserve every day they would be
buying and selling government
securities. Little mini bouts of QE and
QT all day long. When they're buying
treasuries off the open market, that
means they are injecting new cash into
the market, making it easier, helping
interest rates stay lower. And when they
are selling government securities,
they're taking cash out of the market,
making cash more scarce, driving
interest rates up. So they would conduct
open market operations in order to make
sure that the federal funds rate stayed
within their target range. But starting
in 2008, because there was so much cash
injected into the system, they just
thought, hey, this is going to be a lot
easier to be able to make sure that we
can maintain the federal funds rate if
we can just say, "Hey, we're going to
pay interest on reserves. So if you
can't do it amongst yourselves, give us
the reserves and we'll pay you." Now,
this bill would eliminate the Federal
Reserve's ability to pay interest on
reserves, which means we've got $3.3
trillion
sitting at the Federal Reserve right now
that would have to go look elsewhere for
a return on its money. And yes,
basically all of that would go into T
bills and treasuries. Now, if you're
wondering how the Federal Reserve would
be able to maintain the Federal Funds
rate without paying interest on
overnight reserve balances at the Fed,
they would just go back to open market
operations. In other words, manipulating
their balance sheet in order to change
the reserves in the system to target the
interest rate range. It is possible that
reserves right now are still way higher
than they would need to be for the
Federal Reserve to be able to do this
easily. But either way, if this bill
gets passed, they amend the Federal
Reserve. So the Fed stops paying
interest on reserves. $3 trillion floods
out of the Fed, goes buys tea bills, go
buy treasuries, goes and does other
stuff. Lots of easing, lots of new money
being put to work in the economy. Now,
the next and most likely option in my
opinion is this is the Fed's balance
sheet. We just see them return to QE and
this thing starts to grow again. If the
government keeps on borrowing more and
more, driving interest rates high, we
get somebody else in charge at the
Federal Reserve, they just start up QE
again, they become the lender to the US
government at the rate the government
wants. I think this is more likely
because it's much easier. The Fed's been
doing QE for like two decades now. It
would not require a huge change to the
banking system or the way the Fed
operates. It wouldn't require financial
institutions to get used to the Fed
doing open market operations and the
federal funds rate being more volatile.
and it would accomplish the same goal.
The government needs somebody to borrow
from. They can borrow from the Fed. I
think this is the most likely, but
probably not under the current
leadership at the Fed. Now, obviously,
even this is just a short-term band-aid
because quantitative easing doesn't
necessarily mean interest rates stay
lower. Quantitative easing is where the
Fed says, "We'll buy a certain number of
bonds, but a lot of other people could
be selling those bonds." Which means
that even if QE is happening, you could
see something like the 10-year yield
still go higher because there's more
selling than there is buying. Which
means that the long game here with so
much government debt in T bills right
now, I think yield curve control is
likely the long-term solution they'll
use. Yield curve control is like QE but
on steroids. It's where the Fed says,
"We don't care how many, let's say,
10-year Treasuries we have to buy. We're
going to buy as many of them as
necessary to make sure the yield stays
at 4% or 3% or 2% or whatever they
choose. Which means the rest of the
world could sell an unlimited amount of
them and the Fed would just buy them all
at that price. in order for the US
government to be able to successfully
roll over the trillions of dollars of
debt that it has in short-term debt
right now at an interest rate that is
lower than the current market rate. I
think yield curve control is more likely
than not, especially considering the
fact they did this in the 40s and the
50s last time we were here. Especially
considering the fact that the next year
or two we're going to see higher prices
and the market reaction is going to be
push interest rates higher. So, as the
Fed tries to lower rates under pressure
from Trump, it's only going to push down
the low end of the curve, not going to
do anything to help them roll over all
the debt into longer term debt, which
means balance sheet probably goes to the
moon. As always, thank you so much for
watching. Have a great day.