What is money? Many definitions have
been offered over the years and many
different forms of money have been used
throughout the millennia. I would argue
the best definition for money is the
most salailable good. In other words, it
is always the thing that people will
accept as payment because they know
somebody else will accept it as payment
in the future. So, how did the thing
that is used as money go from gold to
paper to digital fiat and what comes
next? This is the history of money. Our
story begins before we have any recorded
or written history. This story begins at
the very beginning of humanity. Now, it
is true that we do not have any
anthropological records of barter being
used as a complex system of money. This
story starts at the very beginning of
humanity. Imagine you and I have
traveled to a new land. There's nobody
else there. We are the first settlers
there. And we begin to make our home. In
order to survive, we need to do some
hunting. Maybe we need to do some
fishing. And we need to build some
shelters. We are each working on
building our own settlements. But from
time to time, you have some things that
I might want or need, and I might have
some things that you may want or need.
For example, I may be a better hunter,
and you might be better at building log
cabins. Now, in reality, I would
probably be worse at both of those
things, but we're just imagining a
hypothetical situation here. So, let's
say we come up with an agreement where
you will build my house for me and I
will supply you with food from what I
have hunted. That way, we both get more
than what we could have on our own.
Because on our own, I would just have
food. On your own, you would just have a
house. This arrangement allows us both
to increase our wealth by engaging in
exchange. Pretty soon, a third person
comes out to our area, settles near us,
and this person just happens to be
really good at making things out of
leather and cloth, like clothing and
shoes. Now, I am in desperate need of
some new shoes. From all of my hiking
and hunting, my current shoes have worn
out. So, I go to the new settler and I
say, "Hey, you know how to make some
shoes. I will provide you with some meat
if you make me some shoes." So again, we
engage in free exchange in this barter
and we both get something that we want.
He gets to get fed and I get some new
shoes. You look at this and say, "Well,
fantastic because you need some new
shoes as well." So you go to the shoe
maker and say, "Hey, I'll build you a
house if you make me a ton of shoes."
And the guy says, "Well, I kind of
wanted to build my own house." But he
says, "I'm hungry, so do you have any
food?" And you say, "Well, not yet." So
then you come to me and say, "Hey, I'll
build you a new little hut that you can
use for storage, that you can use for
smoking meats, that you can use for
whatever you want. In exchange, you give
me some meat because I need to go get
some shoes." And so I say, "Well, that
sounds great." So I go out and do some
hunting. I trade the meat to you for the
extra hut that I'm using for storage.
You take the extra meat that you don't
have to eat, and you go give it to the
new shoe maker, so you can now have some
shoes. As you can see, it's getting a
little complicated. But just wait
because a fourth person soon shows up.
And this person is a fantastic gardener.
They know how to splice different plants
together to produce different fruits and
vegetables. They know what seasons
things should be planted in. They know
all about how to grow food. This
represents an opportunity for all of us
to become even more wealthy together
because of the exchange we can engage in
with each other. giving up some of what
we want less to the other person in
order to get something that we want
more. And so lately, you've been having
a real craving for some fresh fruit. So
you go to the gardener and you say,
"Hey, I would like to trade and barter
with you to get some berries." And the
gardener looks at you, looks down at
your new shoes, and says,
"I would love to exchange with you. How
about you get me a pair of fresh new
shoes, and I will give you some fresh
berries." Suddenly you get pretty
frustrated because the last time you
needed to get shoes, you had to engage
in multiple layers of trade in order to
get that. And now in order to get
berries, you have to add on one more
layer to that. So you have to come to me
and convince me that I need a third
building to use for something else in
exchange for some animal meat that I
have hunted. And then you can take that
and you can give that to the shoe maker
and just hope that he's more hungry and
he's willing to trade you for some
shoes. And then you take those new shoes
that you just got and now you trade them
for some fresh berries. Obviously, this
gets out of hand very quickly. And it
reveals a problem that once you are
outside of emergency situations or have
even just a couple of people trying to
engage in living with each other,
something arises called the coincidence
of wants. In other words, there are
things that we all want from each other,
but we might not have the resources for
the things that the other person wants
instead. And so, engaging in barter in
order to trade your way into something
that somebody else wants so that you can
get what you want becomes so complicated
once you have more than a couple of
people that it's impossible for any sort
of a complex society to run this way.
Now you can imagine with just these four
people very soon something some good
would kind of rise to the top as a good
that just gets traded between us because
we know that somebody else is going to
be willing to accept it as payment later
in this situation. Let's just say maybe
it is salt. Salt is something that is
easily divisible. You can get a little
bit of it or you can get a lot. So it's
going to be easier to trade with salt
than it is to be able to trade with
huts. It's also going to last a lot
longer than something like fresh fruit
or meat. And so I can store up a bunch
of salt myself and just wait before I
use it as payment for basically as long
as I want. And because everybody needs
to eat salt in order to stay alive, I
know that at some point somebody else
will have some need for salt. And so I
can be reasonably sure that I will be
able to use it in order to trade for
something else later. And this is why
throughout history, in certain periods
of time, and in certain places on Earth,
salt has been used as a form of money.
But salt has a problem. And one of those
problems is that it is consumable. And
so the supply of salt is not necessarily
stable. Another problem is that it
dissolves pretty easily if it gets wet.
And so all of your savings from your
labor that you have stored up from
building people huts or hunting for
people, if it rains and you don't have
the proper protection against rain,
maybe all of that labor, all that
saving, all that accumulated wealth just
gets wiped out. And so eventually people
stop accepting salt as payment because
there's always the risk that it just
disappears on them one day if it happens
to get wet. In its place, maybe we start
trading seashells with each other. We
live relatively close to an ocean.
There's a lot of people who have moved
into our area now and they do a lot of
fishing. And so seashells are something
that we can trade with each other that
won't get destroyed just because they
get rained on. And so they solve that
problem that salt has. But they present
another problem and that's that you
don't necessarily have to do much hard
work in order to just get more
seashells. I can just walk down to the
beach and I can collect as many seaells
as I want. And that presents a problem
because if I'm going to accept payment
from you, I'm going to want something
that I can't just get super easily
myself. Why would I accept a dozen
seashells from you for something that I
have to do a lot of work for, like some
meat, when I could just go get the
seashells myself by walking up and down
the shore? And so, while seashells have
been used as a form of money, they as
well did not stick around. Many other
things have risen to the top and
periodically been used as a form of
money throughout history. things like
cattle, beads, large stones. But the one
thing that rose to the top and stuck
around as the permanent form of money
for the longest was gold. The physical
characteristics of gold made it fit
pretty much perfectly as the thing that
could solve the coincidence of wants and
that people would always be willing to
accept as payment because they knew
other people would be willing to accept
it as payment. I can store gold for as
long as I want and I don't have to worry
about rain or rust or time destroying
it. It's actually indestructible. It is
very difficult to get your hands on more
gold because you have to dig it out of
the ground and then you have to melt it
down and refine it. This is something
that takes a lot of time and effort and
usually it's more cost effective to just
make something be productive in society
in order to get your hands on the more
gold that you need and so the supply of
it tends to be pretty stable over time.
Gold is also very easily divisible. It's
malleable, so you can cut it in half.
You can melt it down and cover other
things with it. And so, it's fairly easy
to make very small denominations of gold
that you can use for small transactions.
It's also easy to identify because of
its unique color, which means it's hard
to counterfeit and hard to fake. So
because of these physical
characteristics, it arose to be used as
money, as the most salailable good, the
thing that people were willing to accept
as payment because they knew other
people would be willing to accept it as
payment, and you could hold on to it for
basically as long as you needed to until
you wanted to use it. Now, this natural
evolution shows a distinction between
two types of value. We have use value
and we have exchange value. There are
certain items that have value because
you can use them for a specific purpose.
I want to get my hands on salt so that I
can eat it or preserve meat with it. I
want to get my hands on some shoes so I
can wear them when I walk around. The
subjective value applied to these goods
comes from my ability or desire to use
them in a certain way. There's another
form of value that arises when you start
to observe what money is, and that's
exchange value. The value that people
subjectively ascribe to things that are
used as money is there specifically
because of its value to be used in
exchange. It's a place that they can
store their value and then transfer that
value to somebody else. In other words,
the use of that good is entirely wrapped
up in its ability to be used in exchange
in transactions in payments. And for
most of human history, gold only had
exchange value. Yes, gold was used for
things like jewelry and decoration, but
that arguably arose as a result of it
being valuable as money, not the other
way around. And so for thousands of
years of human history, physical gold
coins and gold bars were physically
moved around the world and used as
payment, used as money. Gold was the
most salailable good. It had value
because people knew other people knew it
had value.
So, how did we move from that to using
paper? Well, it turns out that when you
have a very stable supply of money,
deflation happens over time. We're all
familiar with how inflation works. When
the government increases the money
supply rapidly, you have more money
chasing the same amount of stuff, goods
and services. That obviously will bid up
the prices. The opposite is true as
well. If the money supply stays
relatively stable, but the amount of
stuff that people make increases, then
you have the same amount of money
chasing more goods and services. That
means the price of stuff goes down over
time. Imagine today we magically snapped
our fingers and the number of houses
across the nation increased 10fold. What
do you think would happen to the prices
of houses? They would collapse because
you have the same amount of money
chasing more goods and services, in this
case houses. What do you think would
happen if the supply of cars instantly
10xed? The price and the value of cars
would instantly crash. So over time, if
the money supply stays relatively
stable, but the amount of wealth, the
amount of stuff, the amount of goods and
services that humans create increases,
then those goods and services will cost
less over time. As people figure out
ways to get around faster, get around
more efficiently, create more energy. as
people innovate and invent in order to
produce food faster and more
efficiently. Transportation, energy,
construction, moving from hunter
gatherers to the agricultural revolution
to the industrial revolution, all of
these things increase the amount of
wealth that humans have produced. And if
the money supply stays the same, that
means all of that stuff will get cheaper
over time. And that's exactly what
happened. The money became very valuable
relative to the stuff, which meant
people weren't carrying around their
gold coins anymore for small
transactions. Starting around a thousand
years ago, people started preferring to
keep their gold in storage and keep it
safe because it was very valuable. And
so the first banks arose from goldsmiths
who already had the infrastructure in
place because they already dealt and
worked with gold. They had the security,
they had the storage. So people would
just pay goldsmiths to keep their gold
for them. And in order to make sure that
they could come back and get their gold
at any time, people would be issued
paper notes or receipts that would say
payable on demand to the bearer a
certain number of ounces of gold. And
that way I knew whenever I wanted to, I
could go give the goldsmith my piece of
paper that said, "Redeem this for my
gold." And he would give me my gold
back. This invention, this invention of
paper that was redeemable for gold
allowed a few things to happen. Number
one, there was a subtle transition from
gold being money to gold ownership being
the money because very quickly what
happened was the gold stopped leaving
the vaults. If I have a piece of paper
that says I can come get an ounce of
gold whenever I want, I don't need to go
redeem it for the gold and then use the
gold for payment and then that person
who just sold me something, take that
gold back to the goldsmith and get a new
piece of paper. Instead, I can just give
him my piece of paper because my piece
of paper just says this note is payable
on demand to the bearer in 1 ounce of
gold. Bearer means whoever holds it,
whoever has the paper. So it can operate
as the representation of the ownership
of that gold. So I can just use the
paper itself as payment. This subtle
transition from gold being used as money
to gold ownership being used as money
allowed a boom of globalization.
Suddenly it was next to free in order to
transact across long distances because
you didn't have to pay for the security
and the transportation for a large
quantity of heavy gold. You didn't have
to pay for the insurance just in case it
got stolen. The gold itself could stay
in the vault and all I have to do is
transfer the ownership of that gold to
somebody else, which is a lot easier and
cheaper. The second consequence of this
subtle shift in money was that gold
suddenly became infinitely divisible.
Gold was already pretty divisible before
because it's malleable. You can cut it
in half. You can melt it down. But it
becomes infinitely divisible if on a
piece of paper I can write how much gold
that piece of paper represents. Which
means that I can drop off an ounce of
gold at the goldsmith or at the bank and
he can then issue me 100 pieces of paper
that are each worth 1/100th of an ounce
of gold. If I want to get my ounce of
gold back, I do have to turn all 100 of
those in. But I can also use one of
those at a time for payment. And you can
add as many zeros as you need. Paper
turned gold into an infinitely divisible
form of money which it was not before.
So the invention of paper allowed a boom
of growth, globalization, infinitely
divisible gold ownership to be used as
money and the use of that paper in
everyday transactions took off like a
rocket ship to the point where pretty
soon people weren't redeeming their
paper for gold anymore. If I know I can
use that paper for money and at any time
if I need to, I can go get the gold.
There's really no reason to get the
gold. I'm just opening up risk that
somebody else might steal it from me.
And so these early bankers got an idea.
They said, "Hey, we're issuing out these
pieces of paper and operating a savings
business, but what if we also open up a
loan business?" They looked around and
saw, "Hey, when people lend to each
other, they're lending their own money.
We don't have to because we're the ones
that are creating the money, the paper
that people use as money. So, we can
offer loans and just give people paper
that we create and we can make an
infinite amount of money. Our profit is
literally endless. Now, this was the
invention of fractional reserve banking.
In other words, the entity who is
trusted to hold on to the money, in this
case, the gold, decides to issue more
claims on that gold than they actually
can fulfill. Because remember, every
piece of paper for people to trust that
it is usable as money has to say the
same thing on it. This note is payable
on demand to the bearer in a certain
number of ounces of gold. Which means
the bankers were committing fraud
because they were telling people, "You
can come get your gold at any time when
they actually couldn't." At the
beginning, when the bankers started to
do this, people looked around and all
they saw was a boom. People had more
spending power than they had before.
Prices started going up, profits started
going up, everybody started borrowing
and spending more because everybody felt
like they were getting rich. But one
day, this gravy train came to an end.
And nobody really knows why. Maybe it's
because somebody realized, well, this is
debt. I've got to pay it back. So, they
started to pay back some of their debt,
which pulled money out of circulation.
And that meant less income for the next
guy, which meant he had to start paying
off some of his debt. This deleveraging
popped the boom and led to a bust. out.
The other thing that might have caused
this was somebody looked around and
realized there's a lot more money
floating around than there used to be.
We haven't gotten any more gold
shipments in. Nobody from out of town
has brought any more gold. How does
everybody have so much money? I think
the bank is committing fraud. So that
person went and they said, "Here are my
paper dollars. Give me my gold." And
then they went and told their close
friends and family to go do the same.
After those people quietly went and got
their gold, they all told their closest
friends and family to do the same. Very
quickly, a bank run happened. People
realized there's no money. There's no
gold. All of the paper in circulation
instantly becomes worthless. Nobody
wants it because the only reason it had
value before was cuz they could get gold
with it. And now they can't. The money's
gone. The gold is gone. And so prices
collapse back down to where they were
before. And then they run the banker out
of town or probably hang him. So this
practice of fractional reserve banking
where the bank will issue more claims on
the gold or on the money than they
actually can fulfill is fraud. It is
making a legally binding contractual
promise or guarantee that you know you
cannot fulfill which meant that this
practice should have been outlawed. But
instead it became nationalized starting
around 300 years ago. Governments looked
at this and said hey wait we don't want
to completely stop this from happening
because we see a way that we can benefit
from this. And so they nationalized and
said any bank is allowed to participate
in a limited amount of fraud of
fractional reserve banking as long as
you do it through the national banking
system. And we're going to put a bank on
top of the banks called a central bank.
Now their genius idea was that if one
bank were to fail from a bank run
because they were engaging in fractional
reserve banking or fraud, then that
single bank would be able to draw on the
reserves from the entire banking system
through the central bank. A central bank
is just going to operate as a bank for
banks. And so if one bank gets into
trouble, they can go to their bank, the
central bank, and get more reserves so
that they don't have to worry about a
bank crime. But a funny thing happens
when individuals, in this case the
banks, no longer have to worry about the
risk of failure. then you're going to
take on as much risk as possible to try
and profit as much as possible, which
puts the entire system at risk because
now every bank is just loading up as
much as they can thinking they'll be
able to rely on the central bank in a
case of an emergency. And whether you go
300 years ago to the collapse of the
Mississippi bubble in France or whether
you go a little over a hundred years ago
to the first great depression in America
after the Federal Reserve was started,
you see the same pattern happening very
shortly after a central bank comes into
power. you see a massive nationwide boom
and a bust because the entire system is
loaded up with claims on money that
cannot be fulfilled. The false boom that
occurs as a result of that easy money
inevitably leads to the bust
deflationary death spirals, bank runs,
and economic devastation. Now, in the
fallout of the Great Depression starting
in the United States, the president at
the time, FDR, decided that the real
problem was not the fraud. the real
problem was not the nationwide
fractional reserve banking. The real
problem was not issuing more claims on
the money than could actually be
fulfilled. He said the problem was that
those claims could be fulfilled at all.
He said the problem is Americans can go
and get their money from the banks. So
let's just outlaw that because if we
outlaw that then a bank run won't be
able to happen anymore. And so in 1934,
FDR issued an executive order to ban the
personal ownership of gold in the United
States. He confiscated it all,
consolidated it under federal government
ownership, and then as if to add salt to
the wound, raised the price of gold,
which allowed him to issue even more
paper dollars, whose value was only tied
to gold through a legal declaration.
Now, and what good is that if you can't
actually get your hands on the gold
anyway? Not much. So starting in 1934,
we had the first major step in
transition from the ownership of gold
being transferred as money to the paper
that used to represent ownership of gold
being money itself. As a US citizen, we
were forced by law to start using paper
itself as money. Now keep in mind for
those of you who care about semantics,
there is no difference between currency
and money. Money is the most salailable
good. Money is a thing that people will
accept as payment because they know
other people will accept it as payment.
This can happen by free market exchange
or it can happen by government
declaration. And FDR's government left
American citizens with no choice but to
start accepting paper as the new form of
money. Now, the US government had no
authority over what the rest of the
world did. And so if the US wanted to
continue to be able to do business with
the rest of the world and buy stuff that
we wanted from other places, we would
still have to send them the form of
money that they wanted to accept as
payment, which at the time was still
gold. But fortunately for America and
unfortunately for the rest of the world,
something happened shortly after called
World War II. Now, Europe was devastated
economically after World War II. Most
European nations had spent through all
of their money, which again for them was
gold. But at the same time, the United
States had spent a bunch of that time
producing the stuff that the rest of the
world was buying, the weapons, the
tools, the machinery. And so all the
gold from around the world had slowly
come back into the hands of the United
States government. And so the US made an
agreement with the rest of the world
called the Breton Woods agreement, which
stated that all of the other paper
currencies that the other countries had
would no longer be pegged to gold like
they were before, like the dollar was
before. their paper currencies would be
pegged to the US dollar, redeemable for
the US dollar. And then the US dollar
itself would also be redeemable for gold
for the rest of the world, not for US
citizens. The European countries didn't
really have a choice. And they also
didn't want to have to go back to square
one and try and rebuild their gold
reserves. So they all agreed, which
turned the US dollar as the de facto
money that was used around the world.
Yes, it was redeemable for gold. So the
rest of the world was trading the
ownership of that gold as money just
like American citizens used to do. But
it was still the paper dollar that was
in circulation. And just like every bank
before them and every central bank
before them, the Federal Reserve in the
United States of America decided to
print more claims on that gold than they
could actually fulfill. We sent those
paper dollars out around the world as
payment for stuff we actually wanted.
Those dollars wound up in circulation
all around the globe, increasing the
quantity of money, driving prices higher
and causing a boom. And in the late60s,
the rest of the world started to realize
there was a problem. Prices were rising.
Dollars were abundant. And they thought,
"The United States doesn't have enough
gold to back up all of these claims on
gold." So many nations started turning
in their dollars back to the US
government, saying, "Give us our gold."
And for a while, the United States
complied. But in 1971, the United States
was about 2 weeks away from all the gold
reserves being completely drained. And
so they just said, "No, sorry. Nobody
gets their gold. We're closing the gold
window. You can keep your paper that we
gave you, but it's no longer going to be
able to be exchanged for gold. We're
going to keep the rest." And overnight,
the same thing happened to the rest of
the world that had happened to US
citizens in 1934. The paper itself
became money. The ownership of gold was
no longer being used as money around the
world and the paper stuck. The main
changes that have happened over the last
50 years or so is that we have
transitioned from a physical dollar
system to a digital dollar system. The
dollar still acts as the dominant form
of money around the world. In other
words, the most salailable good, the
thing that people and institutions and
countries are willing to accept as
payment because they know others are
also willing to accept it as payment. It
just happens digitally now instead of
with physical paper. The various
quantities of money and the histories of
transactions are kept in records called
ledgers. Every bank and financial
institution has its own internal ledger
that has a record of all of the various
accounts, who the people are attached to
each of those accounts, and the history
of the transactions of dollars coming in
and out of those accounts. At the end of
the day, banks will reconcile and batch
settle with each other through the
central bank who maintains its own
ledger of the transactions in the
accounts of all the financial
institutions it oversees. These ledgers
are all private. I don't have the
ability to go in and look at Bank of
America's ledgers. In order to
participate on these ledgers, an
individual must be fully identified.
Meaning, if you want to go open a bank
account and participate in the money
system, they have to know your name,
your birthday, your social security
number, your income, your address, car
you drive, and your favorite flavor of
ice cream. There's zero privacy or
anonymity. These ledgers are also fully
centralized in terms of their power and
their control. The central bank sits at
the top where a committee of 5 to 12
people will decide the value of the
money by determining by determining
interest rates and the quantity of money
at their own will. Now today when you
look around the world there are many
contenders for the future of money, the
next form of money. Some of the most
well-known alternatives are simply other
forms of fiat money. In other words,
money that is money by declaration where
a government decides, hey, you have to
use this as money. That might be the
euro. Some examples of these
alternatives are the euro or the yen or
the renmi. But these are all just
different flavors of the same thing.
Some other contenders or alternatives
are things like gold, which if you
didn't skip this entire video, you know
that most of human history, gold
operated as money. It could operate as
money again. And then obviously most
recently we have the rise of
cryptocurrencies specifically Bitcoin
that offer an alternative form of money.
Historically when people stop accepting
the government's form of money for
payment the government is then forced to
adopt whatever the people have already
moved to. You see this happening many
times in many places that experience
hyperinflation where the people start
using gold again as money or the people
start using a different country's
currency as money. They want to get the
control out of the hands of their
government who have proven to be
untrustworthy with controlling the money
supply and the money value. Which means
that a failure, a complete failure of
the dominant fiat currency, in this case
in our case today, the dollar, probably
means that people would not be really
excited about replacing it with yet
another government currency. Now, in
terms of gold, it operated very well for
thousands of years as money. The problem
that it faces today is that the physical
transfer of gold as payment is not
useful in a globalized world. You're not
going to be able to buy anything from
Amazon by sending them a gold coin.
Which means that unless something
catastrophic happens globally that
completely eradicates the internet and
global trade, we're not going to move
back to physical gold being used as
money. However, the ownership of that
gold could be used as money. Going back
to the system that served well for
hundreds of years where gold sat in
vaults and the ownership of that gold
traded as money. In this case, it would
be electronically transferred. Just like
I use my debit card or credit card to
send somebody dollars today, I could do
the same thing to send somebody else a
gram of gold. The gold would stay in the
vault, but the ownership of it would
transfer from me to them. Today, gold is
used as a store of value, not as a
medium of exchange, which means people
buy it and hold on to it because it
preserves their purchasing power. This
is true of individuals all across the
world, and it's also true of sovereign
wealth funds and central banks. In fact,
central bank holdings of gold has now
surpassed US treasuries for the first
time in 50 years. And so, its use as a
savings tool has not gone away, but its
future in use for payments is still a
question mark. Now, something like
Bitcoin is also a contender for the
future of money. Bitcoin is much more
similar to our current system of money
than most people realize. It is a ledger
form of money. Instead of every bank
having its own private ledger that
nobody else can see, Bitcoin is one
public ledger that anybody can see. You
can go and see every single Bitcoin
account. They're called wallets, but
they're accounts. And you can see how
much Bitcoin each account has. And you
can see the entire history of every
Bitcoin transaction that's ever been
made. Because it is public, it is very
difficult, perhaps impossible, to hack
because anybody who's looking at it
would know that it has changed. The
users of Bitcoin are also not fully
identified. It is somewhat private. It
is a pseudonmous ledger, which means you
have a wallet, and if somebody knows
computers really well, they can probably
track down that it's you. But your name
and your social security number and all
of your personal identifiable
information is not necessarily attached
to that wallet. It's also controlled by
everybody who uses the network instead
of a committee of just a couple of
people, which means it is very resistant
to changes in terms of its value or its
quantity. Now, just like gold, nobody
really uses Bitcoin for payments today.
People do use it as a store of value,
means they buy it and they hold on to it
so that their purchasing power can be
preserved. its future as a medium of
exchange or use as payments is still a
question mark. Now the final thought I
would like to leave you with is that
these are exactly the behaviors one
would expect when you see the dominant
form of money starting to fail. This is
called Gresham's law. In other words,
bad money drives out good money. If you
believe that the main form of money that
is being used will lose its purchasing
power in the future, you're going to do
everything you can to get rid of it as
fast as possible, and you instead will
hoard and store other forms of money,
other forms of stores of value. A new
form of money will not displace fully
the old form of money until at some
point nobody is willing to accept the
old one as payment anymore. So, the
dollar is still the most salailable
good. It is a good that people will
accept as payment because they know
other people accept it as payment. But
that doesn't mean that its foundation
isn't being eroded. It's not being used
as a store of value as much as it used
to be. And other alternative competitors
are being used as stores of value
instead. And at some point, it is not
only possible, but likely that one of
these other forms of stores of value
will be the thing that people will
accept as payment. That doesn't change
the fact that something being money is
still just the thing that people accept
as payment because they know other
people will accept it as payment. Money
is always and always will be always has
been the most salailable good. The thing
whose value is mostly or potentially all
exchange value regardless of any or none
use value. And the beauty of it is you
don't have to pick just one. You can
diversify and you can buy some gold and
you can buy some Bitcoin. And if you
want more stuff like this that I don't
put up on YouTube, I do have a free
newsletter. You can start getting that
in your inbox weekly by clicking on the
link in the description below. As
always, thanks so much for watching.