You're probably aware by now that Social
Security is quite literally the largest
Ponzi scheme in history. But recently
there's been growing push back, a
response to that fact, saying, "Well,
yeah, but really, isn't everything a
Ponzi scheme? I mean, look at your 401k.
The only reason you're able to get more
out of your retirement later on is
because new investors come in and buy
you out." In other words, it's a Ponzi
scheme, just like Social Security. And
what about things like gold or Bitcoin
that only go up in price and allow you
to cash out later on because new
investors are paying you more? And what
about insurance? Even when you look at
health insurance, life insurance, car
insurance, the only reason why you are
able to have your benefits is because
new investors come in and pay you out.
Isn't everything in the financial world
just a Ponzi scheme? And while this
argument can seem quite compelling on
the surface, I'm going to show you that
it's actually just slight of hand.
There's a true definition of Ponzi
scheme and it truly matters what is and
what isn't a Ponzi scheme because Ponzi
schemes represent true loss. In other
words, they cause harm and damage
people, leaving some worse off than they
were before. They're immoral and it is
important to know what is one and what
is not so that we can try and put an end
to the ones that really are. My name is
Joe Brown. I'm a former stock broker and
now I run Heresy Financial where I help
active investors decrease portfolio risk
and increase long-term returns. Many
investors today are banking on the fact
that social security will be there
someday for them when they retire and
therefore they have not invested enough
to support themselves. So if social
security is truly a Ponzi scheme, this
matters because many people will not
have the amount that they think they
will in retirement as a result. So what
is a Ponzi scheme? The definition of a
Ponzi scheme is a system where earlier
participants are paid exclusively using
the contributions of later participants
with no exchange or production of real
value. So first let's take a look at a
recent example of a real world Ponzi
scheme. Many of you are familiar with
Bernie Maidoff who is an investor with
an amazing skill and track record. So
much so that people actually begged to
open accounts with him. However, in
December of 2008, the truth finally came
out that he was actually running a Ponzi
scheme. Maid off ended up receiving a
150-year prison sentence for his crimes.
Now, this Ponzi scheme was run very
similarly to any other simple Ponzi
scheme. He went to an investor and said,
"Hey, here are the returns. I'll promise
you, let's just say 12%." They would
say, "That sounds great. Here is my
million dollars." So, he would say,
"Thank you for your million dollars."
And the next year, he would pay them out
their returns. As the news spread about
his very consistent, safe, reliable,
high returns, more and more people
wanted to invest with him and started
writing him checks. As long as more
money was coming in than he was paying
out in returns to old investors,
everything was great. But the key thing
is this money was not being invested and
the returns were not actually real. They
were just sitting in an account. While
he was telling his investors that they
were earning 12% or 10% or 20%, it could
be anything. the money was actually not
doing anything. It was just sitting in
the bank. But the investors just didn't
care enough to look into it, at least at
first, because they were seeing on paper
the numbers that they wanted to see. And
when they requested withdrawals or
requested their payouts, they would get
them. The only time it becomes a problem
is when too many people want their money
back all at once because it's not
actually there. This brings us to our
second example, which is social
security. And why people call social
security a Ponzi scheme, because it
operates the exact same way. In fact, if
social security was run by any company
or person other than the government,
they would be in jail. It would be shut
down. So, here's how it works. They
first approach the new investors. In
this case, it is anybody with a job. And
they say, "Hey, we are going to pay you
out in your old age a certain number of
dollars per month based on how much
money you contribute into this
investment fund." Now, the difference
here is that they don't actually give
you a choice. They're going to take your
money no matter what. You don't have the
option to just opt out. So they take
your money from your paycheck and they
say as a result of that this is going to
be like a pension. We're going to pay
you in the future from the returns from
the money that you put into the trust
fund. The only problem is that's not
what's happening. They are taking your
money to pay it out to other old people
who are currently the beneficiaries. The
money is not being invested. There's no
real growth and nothing happening with
it. Your money is going in and it is
going out to pay somebody else. And
everybody who is currently getting paid
from social security was the same exact
thing when they were young and paying
into it. They weren't paying into
anything. They were paying other old
people who are already retired. In other
words, the government was stealing money
from some people to pay out other
people. And now that those people are
old, they are demanding that the
government keep on stealing money from
some people to give to them. And it's
not like this is a new problem. You can
see the Social Security Administration
released this report all the way back in
2010 saying that the Social Security
trust fund would be empty by 2037. Once
that account is empty, they can only pay
out what gets paid into it by current
employees, which would mean that payouts
would be reduced to 76% of what they
currently are. And it's not like this
problem has gotten better since 2010.
That original depletion date of 2037 has
only moved closer in time. And now
they're estimating a depletion date of
around 2032 or 2033. That is only 8
years away. Sometimes things get too
abstract when we think about dollars and
the digital system and security programs
and insurance and benefits. So let me
make this very clear what is actually
happening by giving you a desert island
example. There's a hundred people who
have been deserted on an island. One
person is very old. Regardless of how
many seashells and coconuts and fish and
tools that old person has stored up, he
is collecting fish and coconuts from
everybody else who is actually working
on the island. In 20 years, when he has
gotten old and died, and now somebody
else is the oldest on the island, the
new person who is the oldest on the
island says, "Hey, when I was young and
working, I had to give up some of my
coconuts and fish to pay that old guy.
Now, because of that, I want you to give
up some of your coconuts and fish to pay
me because now I'm the old guy." You may
hear this description and think, well,
that's perfectly fine. That's the way a
social society should work. And that's
an argument that can be made. I would
disagree with, but you can make that
argument. The argument you can't make is
that that is fundamentally different
than the way social security operates
today. So now, let's take a look at how
this differs from three other categories
that are mostly free market categories.
We have investments and assets, we have
tools and capital, and we have
insurance. First, let's look at
investments and assets. Somebody who is
trying to convince you that investments
and assets are Ponzi schemes will give
you the following description. I invest
in the stock market by buying shares at
a certain price. Let's say $100 per
share. I grow old, time goes on, 20, 30
years pass, and those shares that I
bought have increased in price because
new investors have come along and paid
more for those shares than I originally
paid for them. Now that those shares are
worth more because of the new investors,
I sell my shares for $500 per share to
new contributors or new investors. And I
am able to make a living off of the fact
that those new investors came in and
paid me out more than I contributed.
Sounds like a Ponzi scheme, right?
Because it relies on new investors
putting in more than I did and paying
out earlier participants. Here's the
real mechanics of what is actually going
on with an investment. I am purchasing
ownership of a real business and that
real business produces real goods or
services. These goods or services are
sold or exchanged to customers in a
mutually beneficial arrangement. Nobody
buys a cell phone unless they want the
cell phone more than the money they are
giving up. Nobody buys a burger unless
they want the burger more than the money
they are giving up. So the customer
gives up something they want less, which
is the money for something they want
more, which is the product. And the
company in return gives up something
they want less which is the product for
something they want more which is the
money. These cash flows and these
profits are the basis for the value of
the business that I own a part of. If
and here's the key only if the company
grows from wealth creation continuing to
expand the products and services that it
provides to people in mutually
beneficial exchanges. Do I benefit by
having my slice of ownership of that
company grow? There is no guarantee
here. If the company does not create
more wealth over time, then my company
shrinks, which means the size of the
slice of the pie that I own actually
shrinks as well. In other words, there's
real wealth creation going on here as a
result of the free market exchange. It's
not a zero- sum game. Amazon's market
share does not represent the market
share that it took from competitors that
have gone out of business. It represents
mostly market share that was created out
of nothing from the value it created
that customers are willing to pay for.
Apple's market share does not exist
solely from market share it took from
competitors. It created that market
share. This is wealth creation. It is
not a zero- sum game. And owning a piece
of that means if that wealth creation
continues, then your ownership slice
increases. If you want a very simple
desert island example of what's going on
here, imagine a hundred of us are
stranded on a desert island and I want
to make a lemonade stand. Unfortunately,
this island does not have any lemon
trees, but they do have coconut trees.
So, I'm making a coconut drink stand.
Now, as I build this coconut stand, it
takes time. It takes labor. I have to go
collect coconuts that I don't eat
myself, and I have to make drinks with
them. I have to make the cups. I have to
make the table. I have to put time and
resources and labor into making this
system that I can then give somebody
else something that they want more. In
other words, in this case, a cup of
coconut water. Now, the cool thing about
this is that that person that I sell the
coconut water to, they don't have to go
collect the coconuts themselves and do
all the work that I did. And so, because
of that, they are willing to give me
something in exchange for that so that
they don't have to go get the coconuts
themselves. In this case, maybe it's
fish. and I charge one fish for five
cups of coconut water. Now, not
everybody on the island knows about
this, so I have to spend time going
around and doing marketing and telling
everybody on the island that this exists
and convincing people, hey, your life
would be a lot easier if you could just
focus on doing the thing that you do
best, right? Wouldn't you like to focus
on just building huts since you're so
good at that? Leave the coconut water
getting to me. I'm really good at that,
and you'll get more coconut water as a
result if we participate in this
mutually beneficial exchange. Now,
there's a kid on the island that doesn't
actually have very many skills. And so,
what I do is I hire him and I say, "Hey,
I will pay you in coconut water if you
come and work for me so that I can try
and grow this coconut water stand." Now,
he's all for this cuz he doesn't know
how to fish. He doesn't know how to get
coconuts himself. He doesn't know how to
build huts or do anything else on the
island, but he still needs a way to
provide value so that he can take care
of himself. So, I give him a job and
he's able to drink some of the coconut
water as his payment and he's happy to
do so because along the way he's also
learning how to run the whole coconut
stand. Now, over the months and years,
I've dialed in this coconut stand to a
precise machine and I know it produces
for me 15 fish per day and I can use
those fish to go out in the on the
island and buy things from other people
that I want using those fish. And
because I have hired a couple of people
to run the stand for me, I don't have to
do that labor anymore myself. And so I
really own a business that is producing
cash flow. In this case, the cash is
fish. But I'm getting old and I don't
want to have to run this coconut stand
myself. And so I would like to sell this
coconut stand. It is a business now. It
produces 15 fish per day. And so I find
a few buyers on the island who want to
buy that from me and are willing to pay
me hundreds of fish and hundreds of
coconuts to purchase this because they
know it's a welloiled machine and it's
going to provide a return for them on
their investment. As a result of my sale
of the coconut stand to other island
members, I am able to have a payday and
I'm able to live the rest of my days in
peace without having to run the business
myself. Those people that bought the
coconut stand may try and grow that
business further and sell it themselves
in the future. But the business has
value in and of itself because of the
wealth it creates and the cash flow and
the profits it produces for the owners.
That's why they bought it and it didn't
exist before, at least to that extent,
which is why I was able to sell it for
more than what I bought it for, which
was nothing because I created it. In
conclusion, investments and assets are
not Ponzi schemes because the asset
itself produces wealth and ownership of
that asset produces profits. Selling
that ownership to somebody else relies
on that asset being attractive to the
buyer and it only happens if the buyer
is sufficiently certain of those future
profits continuing. In other words,
there is an exchange of real value
taking place at the exit. It is not a
one-way transfer from one person to the
other. They pay me and they receive an
asset. Okay, so it's clear now that
investments and assets are not Ponzi
schemes because they generate real
wealth. But what about things like
tools? What about things like capital?
Examples here that people would use
would be things like gold or Bitcoin
because they don't produce profits.
They're not companies. They don't
produce cash flows or real products or
services. And you could also throw other
forms of capital into this category like
equipment, like tractors. The person who
is trying to convince you that things
like this are a Ponzi scheme will say
that I buy a yellow metal that is
smashed into flat circles. I grow old,
that yellow metal increases in price
because new buyers of that yellow metal
are paying more for it than I paid for
it. So, I sell my yellow metal to new
investors for a higher price than I paid
for more than I put in, and I'm able to
retire and live on that. Sounds like a
Ponzi scheme, right? because this relies
on new investors giving me more than I
put in. Here's the real mechanics of
what is going on here. I bought a tool
or capital. Cap. The definition of
capital is just something that allows
you to get what you want. A mouse can be
considered capital and it could be
considered productive capital if I use
it for my business to help me make money
or it can be considered consumption
capital if I use it to play video game
for enjoyment. It's not the nature
inherently of the thing itself that
makes it productive or consumption
capital. It's the way that you use it.
Gold and things like Bitcoin fall into
this category as well. Gold is a
monetary asset. It is a tool that
functions as in the role of money. What
does money do? Money stores value and
then serves as the medium to exchange
that value to somebody else in the
future. So something that performs the
role of money very poorly would be
something like rice. Yes, you can store
rice for a while and the value of that
rice is probably not going to fluctuate
that much unless there's a big drought
and then the rice becomes really
valuable or maybe something happens, a
new innovation happens, everybody's able
to grow a lot more rice and so the value
would go down. But ultimately the value
of that rice is probably usually not
going to fluctuate that much. But the
problem is it doesn't last forever. So,
I can't store that rice for 40 years and
then try and sell it later in order to
live off of. It has a shelf life. It can
get eaten by bugs and by mice. And so,
while things like rice have been used as
money in the past, they never persisted
very long as a form of money because of
some major flaws. That's why things like
gold rose to the top because it
performed that function. It was a tool
that was used as money and it did very
very well. It was easily recognizable.
very very difficult to make more of,
very difficult to fake or forge. It's
indestructible, literally lasts forever.
You cannot manufacture more of it. You
can only dig some out of the ground with
time and labor and effort. And so it is
a tool that performs the function of
serving as money. Now, Bitcoin, whether
you like it or not, is also a monetary
tool. It is designed to store and
transfer value. With a monetary tool,
the better it does its job, the more
valuable it gets over time relative to
everything else. Take for example the
dollar. The dollar performs the various
functions of money, most of them pretty
well. There's liquidity. Many people
will accept it as payment. Problem is
the supply keeps on increasing and
sometimes erratically and sometimes very
quickly. And that supply increase is
faster than the increase in the growth
of the real goods and services that
people want. And so we get inflation,
which means the value of the money goes
down relative to all the stuff. It takes
more dollars to get all the stuff.
Something like gold, the supply
increases very very slowly, which means
the supply of everything else increases
more rapidly and so the value of that
gold relative to everything else
actually goes up. It does the opposite
of dollars. So far, Bitcoin does the
same thing as well. And so with capital,
the better they do their job and perform
the functions that they're supposed to
do, the more valuable they will become.
Monetary tools by nature can continue to
increase in value in perpetuity because
their value is relative to everything
else and we can continue to make more
goods and services. If something like a
computer were to get better over time
and it instead of slowing down it would
get faster over time and the storage
would increase over time and that
computer would also get more valuable
over time. So with
capital/tools, the better they serve
their functions, they perform their
roles, the more valuable they get over
time. For a very simple desert island
example of what is going on here,
imagine that throughout my years on the
island, I make tons of hammers. I make
tons of umbrellas. I make tons of spoons
and forks and bowls and cups out of
coconuts. And some of them I sell to
other islanders as time goes on just so
I can have food and survive. But a lot
of them I actually store up and I don't
get rid of. I keep them. Now these
aren't investments. They're not
producing anything for me. They're not a
business. There's no cash flow. They're
just tools. They are idle capital not
being put to work. But once I get too
old and I can no longer perform the
functions that I used to, I slowly sell
these tools one by one. I sell a hammer
here. I sell an umbrella there and then
over time I am able to continue to make
a living as I provide society something
that they want in return for something
that I want. This is not a Ponzi scheme
because the exchange of value is going
both ways. I'm not taking from somebody
who is younger simply because I'm old.
I'm giving somebody else something that
they want more than what they are giving
up to give me. Which means from this
exchange we are both better off. And the
only reason I had this capability is
because of years of deferred consumption
and accumulated capital. In other words,
I produced more than I consumed so that
I had a surplus to draw on later. Okay,
fine. You say it makes sense that
investments and assets that produce cash
flow are not Ponzi schemes. It also
makes sense that things like gold and
accumulated capital over the long term,
you selling those are not Ponzi schemes
because we've got value going both ways.
But what about insurance? The person
who's trying to convince you that
insurance is a Ponzi scheme, just like
Social Security, is going to tell you,
number one, you put money into the
insurance company. You pay your premium.
Number two, you get into an accident or
you die or you submit a claim, and then
the new contributors pay you out. Sounds
like a Ponzi, right? It relies on new
buyers giving you more than you paid in.
Here are the real mechanics of what is
going on with insurance. And I need to
make the caveat here. I'm talking only
about private free market insurance.
This doesn't apply to any insurance
product with government involvement.
Government involvement usually means
that the premiums are a lower cost than
they would be otherwise or the benefits
are larger than they would be otherwise
or sometimes a mix of the two. None of
the mechanics I'm going to talk about
here will work if you do have outside
intervention. They only work in a
completely free market. So for this
example, you're going to have to think
of things like jewelry theft insurance.
Healthcare doesn't count here. Even auto
insurance doesn't count here. Many life
insurance products don't count here.
Those all have too much government
regulation for this to work. With
insurance, free market insurance, there
is an exchange of value happening at
both the purchase and at the payout.
These are not one-way transfers. Ponzi
schemes have one-way transfers of money
going from new contributors out to old
participants. With insurance, we have
two-way exchanges of value. So, first I
pay my insurance premium. What am I
getting for that? I am getting a
transfer of risk. In other words, if I
get my jewelry stolen from me, then I
have the risk of that loss. Especially
if it is expensive jewelry, then I might
have risk of really large loss. And so,
I am paying somebody else for the right
to push that loss on to them if
something were to happen. In other
words, I am exchanging the low
probability of really, really large loss
for a high probability of a really,
really small loss because I'm guaranteed
that I'm going to give up my premiums.
10 bucks a month, 50 bucks a month,
whatever it is. Guaranteed I'm giving
that up. Small loss. But now I no longer
have to risk the potential very large
loss of thousands of dollars. The only
way this works is if it is priced in a
way that is mutually beneficial. Because
if the insurance company cannot profit,
in other words, the premiums are so low
that when there are payouts and claims
submitted, it wipes them out and they go
bankrupt. Well, then the insurance
company doesn't exist anymore. So, I
cannot as a consumer transfer my risk to
somebody anymore. So, the price of the
premium has to be enough where the
insurance company can make a profit so
that they can stay in business. That's
the only way to ensure that I get what I
want, which is to get rid of my risk of
large loss. On the other hand, if it is
priced so high that I can't afford it,
then theoretically, yeah, they would
have massive profits. But if people
can't actually afford to buy it, then
then again, the consumer doesn't get
what they want, which is to transfer
that risk. And then if it's priced too
high, they don't get what they want
either, which is profits, so that they
can stay in business and enjoy the cash
flow. So the pricing on insurance is
mutually beneficial so that both parties
get what they want. The consumer gets to
transfer the risk of loss to the
insurance company and the insurance
company gets to profit even accounting
for all the payouts along the way. A
very simple desert island example of
what's going on here. Let's say half of
us on the island are coconut harvesters
because we just go through coconuts so
much. They got food. They've got water
in them. They got electrolytes. Fat.
They're great. But obviously climbing up
coconut trees to gather those coconuts
risks falling off that tree becoming
paralyzed and you can't support yourself
anymore. So there's one guy on the
island who came up with a great idea to
create an insurance product for the
coconut collectors. And this is
paralyzation insurance. If something
happens to you and you fall off the
tree, you get paralyzed and you will get
a payout of four coconuts a day for the
rest of your life. Now this coconut
insurance is cheap. It's only two
coconuts per week. Over the course of
the years, one or two people do actually
end up falling off the trees and
becoming paralyzed, but the payments
from everybody else who is participating
in the insurance program are enough to
cover the payouts. And that insurance
guy, he can stay in business because
there's still a profit after accounting
for those payouts. So the insurance guy
gets something he wants which is just
constant cash flow of coconuts coming in
and the coconut collectors get something
they want which is the risk of loss is
transferred to the insurance guy. They
know if they fall off and get paralyzed
they don't have to be worried about
starving the rest of their life. In
other words, insurance is not a Ponzi
scheme because both the risks and the
terms of the agreement are known and
transparent beforehand. The exchange
happens voluntarily and value is being
exchanged both ways. In this case, it's
money going one direction and risk
transfer going the other direction. And
both parties voluntarily participate
because they are both made better off as
a result. Let's go back to the
definition of the Ponzi scheme we
covered at the beginning of the video. A
Ponzi scheme is a system where earlier
participants are paid exclusively using
the contributions of later participants
with no exchange or production of real
value. Real investments and assets are
not Ponzi schemes because they are
ownership in assets that produce real
value and profits. Number two, tools and
capital are not Ponzi schemes because at
the point of sale, value is being
exchanged both ways. And it can only
happen because of deferred consumption.
In other words, production that is
larger than consumption. Number three,
insurance is not a Ponzi scheme because
the terms and the risks are known both
ways. And that transfer of risk is made
voluntarily on both sides. And as I hope
is abundantly clear at this point,
Social Security does not fall into any
of these three categories. Number one,
the transfer is not voluntary. It is
forced. Number two, the pricing and the
terms are unknown ahead of time.
Premiums fluctuate through your life and
the payouts are unknown. Number three,
no real value is being exchanged as a
result of purchasing the premiums for
social security because it is not an
exchange of value. It is a transfer of
money from you to somebody else. Number
four, there is no investment in any
ownership of any asset that produces any
realworld goods or services or products.
As a result, there are no profits and
there are no cash flows, which is why
social security is living on borrowed
time and has about eight years left
until it's completely drained. It is the
biggest Ponzi scheme in history. But
thinking that just because other things
might look a little similar on the
surface means that those are Ponzi
schemes as well, will force people to
secondguess investing, producing more
than they consume, deferring
consumption, thinking if everything's a
Ponzi scheme, then might as well just
forget about it and not care. This is
wrong. This is dangerous and is leaving
so many people woefully unprepared for
the point at which they will not be able
to rely on the government to support
them anymore or I should really say rely
on the government to take money from
other people to support them anymore.
But don't worry, it is never too late.
If you think you have not saved enough
for retirement or your returns are not
where you would like them to be and
you'd like me to help you apply ideas
like this to your investing, click on
the link in the description below. As
always, thanks so much for watching.
Have a great day.