Is it possible that everything we
thought we knew about the relationship
between inflation and interest rates is
wrong, potentially even backwards? It's
no secret that we are headed into an
easy money environment, one in which
we'll see lower interest rates, the
government spending and printing more
money, quantitative tightening by the
Fed ending, and potentially even QE
restarting. And we are seeing similar
moves by governments and central banks
all around the world, not just in the
US. As a result, myself and many people
have been saying we should expect higher
prices as a result of this. But here I
would like to show you a chart of the
Federal Reserves interest rates overlaid
with the inflation rate as measured by
the CPI. The blue line that you are
looking at is the Federal Reserves
interest rate. It's called the Fed funds
rate. Now, this is not the interest rate
that everybody pays on debt. This is the
interest rate that banks pay each other
to borrow cash from each other
overnight. But this is the interest rate
that the Federal Reserve controls and
then other interest rates across the
curve are influenced by this interest
rate. Now, one really curious thing that
I would like to point out to you is the
time period in between 1960 and 1980.
And what you'll see during this time
period is that interest rates and
inflation moved in lock step. As the Fed
was raising interest rates, inflation
was rising. As the Fed was lowering
interest rates, inflation was dropping.
If we zoom in just on this time period,
you can see it a little bit more clearly
that not only were these moves basically
in lock step in terms of direction, but
the Fed's moves on interest rates
actually somewhat preceded the moves in
interest rates. In other words, the
Federal Reserve began raising interest
rates right here in 1961. And then right
at the beginning of 1962,
inflation started following it up
higher. Right here in 1969, the Fed
stopped raising interest rates and then
started reducing interest rates and
shortly after inflation started moving
down as well. Here in 1972, the Fed
started raising interest rates and later
in 1972 inflation started following it
back up and then here in 1974 the Fed
started lowering interest rates and then
later in 1974 inflation started falling
as well. So, we see a relationship that
is almost exactly backwards from what
most of us would expect. By the way,
guys, what the dollar itself is doing in
terms of its purchasing power for assets
and goods and services is just going
down. It's been doing that for a hundred
years now, and that is not changing
anytime soon. So, if you're interested
in learning what my favorite way is to
make money from the falling value of the
dollar over the coming quarters and
years, then on November 23rd at 7:00
p.m. Eastern time, this is in just a
couple of days. Now, I'm going live to
detail my trading strategy, and this is
one that I believe will pay out big as
the Fed moves to send its printers into
overdrive. In fact, I've been using this
strategy in my own account to generate
double and triple-digit returns on
individual investments in a matter of
months. This is not value investing.
This is not asymmetric trading. It's not
using margin and we're definitely not
touching bonds. This is in a different
category altogether, the resource space.
In fact, you've already probably started
to see headlines like this about this
space heating up already. And I think I
have the perfect way to play it. Again,
this requires no margin, no futures, no
leveraging up your account. If you're
interested in learning what my strategy
is, exactly how I'm playing this, and
how I've been playing this in my own
account for over a year, click on the
link in the description below to
register to attend. It's free. Spots are
limited, so don't wait to sign up if
you're planning on joining. Look forward
to seeing you there. Now, in order to
understand what is going on here, we
have to understand what interest rates
would do in a free market. And when I
say free market, I mean a market that is
not regulated or controlled by things
like the Federal Reserve or the
government. In other words, I mean a
free market. And that means one in which
the money is not imposed on the people
and interest rates are not imposed on
the economy but they are freely chosen
by all participants in the market and
that those prices are set by market
activity not by declaration or decision.
Historically money that people have
chosen to use for themselves outside of
government intervention has been gold.
So imagine we have a hypothetical small
economy with no market regulations and
they use gold coins for money. It's
unrealistic given today, but this is to
understand the mechanics of interest
rates. So bear with me in this
particular moment where we're dropped
into this hypothetical economy. Let's
say everybody has a ton of savings.
They've got a bunch of gold coins all
stored under their mattress. One person
decides that they want to go invest
their money and produce more goods to
sell. So they're going to start spending
their money that they have, but they
need more. So they start going from door
to door and asking anybody if they're
willing to lend their money to them. Now
at this time everybody has a bunch of
money. In other words, the savings pool
is deep and large. So he is able to
compare interest rates from all the
potential lenders and make them bid
against each other for his business.
Which means the interest rate that he's
going to get to be able to borrow is
going to be fairly low because he's
going to go with whoever will give him
the best interest rate. as he borrows,
let's say at 1% and spends and invests,
other people will notice this business
activity and will realize, hey, now is
probably a good time to borrow and
invest because interest rates are super
low. So, everybody then starts spending
and borrowing and investing. Well, as
this money gets pulled into circulation
through borrowing and spending and
investing, it also starts circulating
through the economy faster, which means
people's incomes grow, but also their
debt loads grow. As people's incomes
grow, they're able to borrow more from
each other. Eventually though, this
cycle has to come to an end because the
amount that people have in savings will
start to be dwarfed on average by the
amount that people have borrowed and the
debt will have to start getting paid
off. And the tipping point happens when
eventually somebody goes to borrow and
they realize, hey, I can't find anybody
who has really any money to lend at an
interest rate that I want to borrow at.
If I want to borrow, I'm going to have
to pay six, seven, eight, nine, 10%
because the few people who have any
savings left are able to demand a higher
rate because there's nobody left willing
to lend. All of us borrowers are now
competing for that money. And so the
incentive in the system is now, hey, I
don't want to borrow and spend anymore.
I want to save and pay down my debt. And
so that income starts to dry up as
people take some of that income out of
circulation and instead of reinvesting
it, they use it to pay down their debts.
So when the savings pool has been
depleted, the interest rate is naturally
higher which flips the incentive and now
everybody wants to save so that they can
be the lender and just make money by
saving and lending instead of having to
do the work of investing. And that
incentive drives money back into savings
which refills the savings pool. In a
completely free market, usually this
dynamic is distributed across different
incomes, different wealth levels,
different productions and different
sectors and different industries. And
those swings between the savings pool
being depleted or being full are not
very extreme because the incentives are
always there in place ready to
counterbalance the system. Now the
relationship here between interest rates
and the savings pool is pretty clear.
But what is not as clear is what this
does to prices. Because on the surface
you look at this and you can say okay
well because all the money is being
spent now it's being invested. the
velocity of money goes up as everybody
starts borrowing and spending. It is
pretty clear that that should result in
upward pressure on prices because all
else being equal, you have more demand
now for the same amount of goods and
services. So that should drive prices
higher. But the part of the equation
that most people don't look at is that
second part, the number of goods and
services. Because when the interest rate
is low and it drives that money into
investing and spending, that increases
production of goods and services. Think
about every business out there. when
interest rates go down that roll over
their corporate bonds that borrow more
issue more debt and they use that to
hire people and they use that to do R&D.
Think about all the consumers who borrow
money to buy houses and cars and
sometimes toys. All of that extra income
going into the hands of corporations who
use that to reinvest in their company in
order to grow their profits and their
revenues even more. And so it's really
easy to focus just on the money side of
things and just on the consumption, but
that ignores half of what is going on is
that when money is easier to borrow
because it's cheaper, but that in and of
itself drives down the cost of
production, which drives down the cost
of goods. Now, if we look back at this
chart about the relationship between the
Federal Reserve's interest rate and the
CPI, we can see that the correlation
between these two things that held up
from the '60s through the 80s has not
necessarily been happening for the last
20 years or so. The Fed was lowering
interest rates from 2002 all the way
through 2004. And yet, the inflation
rate started to pick up. And then as the
Fed raised interest rates, eventually
inflation stopped rising and started
falling drastically into 2006 and 2007.
And then once the Fed began lowering
interest rates in 2007, the inflation
rate picked up again. The most notable
and recent example is when the Fed
lowered interest rates to zero. After
2020, the inflation rate spiked to a
recent record and then finally the Fed
started to raise interest rates again
and the inflation rate started to fall.
So the question is why is there such a
big difference between the last 20 years
that relationship between inflation and
interest rates versus what was happening
from the '60s through about 1980. And
the answer is that interest rates are
not the dominant driving force in any of
this. First of all, if you look at the
United States government's debt compared
to the size of the economy, it was
falling from 1960 through 1980 and it
was relatively low, bottoming around
30%. Compare that to last 20 years where
we've seen the debt to GDP ratio over
100% pretty much the entire time and
near 125% today. In other words, the
total debt load in the economy and the
cost of servicing that debt is much
higher than it was back then. Now, I
can't find this data prior to 1980, but
you can see that at least since 1980,
the money supply compared to the size of
the economy is much larger today than it
was back then. So, the economy has much
more debt in it today than it used to.
and a much higher money supply than it
used to. Which means changes to interest
rates are going to have different
effects on the economy because there are
other variables in the economy that are
also different. But despite that, it is
absolutely true that if you are a
company, if you are a business, whether
you have a lot of debt right now or you
don't have a lot of debt, if interest
rates go down, it will be cheaper and
easier for you to grow. And by grow, I
mean produce more stuff in order to get
more revenue and more profit. As you and
your competitors all produce more stuff,
supply goes up. So, we can't just look
at the money side of the equation. We
can't just look at the demand. We also
have to look at the supply of the wealth
of the goods and services that people
want to consume. Now, I'm not making the
case that the Fed lowering interest
rates over the next couple of quarters
is going to actually push prices
themselves lower because again, that is
not the dominant or only driving force.
There are lots of other things at play.
But the increase in production of goods
and services is something that we should
be taking into account when looking at
where prices will go. And the flip side
is also true. As interest rates stay
artificially high, it is more expensive
for companies to borrow money and spend
money and invest money. And in fact, the
incentive for those companies is not to
spend it. If I can get 5% risk-free by
just sitting that money with the
government, I'm not going to take the
risk of trying to grow the business. I'm
going to put it in treasuries and just
wait until a better opportunity comes
up. adjusted for risk. And so the higher
interest rates are, the more it stifles
business activity and slows down the
increase in the production of goods and
services. And so if you're wondering why
assets like stocks tend to go up when
interest rates are dropping and tend to
go down when interest rates are rising,
this certainly has something to do with
it. There's a big rotation going on in
the markets right now and specifically a
few sectors that look primed to do the
best over the coming years. If you're
interested in learning my playbook about
how I'm approaching markets over the
coming quarters, don't forget to sign up
for my upcoming event. It's in just a
couple of days. Click on the link in the
description below. I'm going to show you
everything I know. As always, thanks so
much for watching. Have a great day.