February jobs report just got a monster
revision and not in the right direction.
February payroll numbers were just
revised down by 41,000
jobs. And February numbers were already
negative bringing them to a total of
133,000
jobs lost in just 1 month. However, we
just saw the March numbers come out
which saw a massive surprise gain. The
consensus estimate for payroll additions
in March was 59,000,
but March payrolls actually rose by
178,000.
So, what is going on here? Is the jobs
market getting worse? Is the jobs market
getting better? How reliable are these
numbers especially considering we are
constantly seeing revisions, massive
revisions to prior numbers. And more
importantly, where are we headed? Have
things bottomed and are turning around
and we are headed towards better times
or are we just starting to see things
fall off the edge of a cliff towards
recession? Well, it's important to look
at a longer-term view for some of these
things. So, take a look at this chart.
We're going back to 2022 and we can see
the monthly payroll numbers have been on
the decline for the last couple of
years. While a lot of people liked to
blame Biden about the low jobs numbers
in 2024 and a lot of people now are
liking to blame Trump about the low job
numbers in 2025 and 2026. There's
something else that is much longer-term
going on here and I'll show you that in
just a moment. For an even longer-term
chart, we can take a look at the data
from the Federal Reserve. What you're
looking at here is the percentage change
in non-farm payrolls compared to the
year prior. Now, one thing you'll notice
is that prior to the year 2000, what we
saw was some very predictable
cyclicality here. You'd see total
payrolls rise and usually they decline
along with a recession. Whether the
recession happened at the beginning of
the decline or after, typically that's
what we would see. Rise and fall, rise
and fall. But recessions started
becoming less and less common after the
1980s, and that is partly due to the
massive increase in the ability of the
Federal Reserve to print money once they
were no longer anchored to a gold
standard. That allows artificial
manipulation of the numbers so that a
real recession or a real hard period of
time for the economy and for people
might not show up in the numbers because
they're being papered over. So, prior to
the '80s, you see longer periods of time
with sustained job growth, especially as
we near the 2010s. In fact, from about
2011 through 2020, basically an entire
decade, non-farm payroll growth stayed
right around 2%. Obviously, we had the
big drop during 2020. There was a big
surge in 2021. And zooming in on the
data since 2021, we've seen just a
steady decline since then. If we change
the graph to look at just the total
numbers rather than the percentage
change, we can see a couple interesting
things. If we look at the trajectory
from about 1940 through 1960, and we
plot that forward, we can see that job
growth is well above that trend.
However, if we look at the trend from
1960 through 1980, and we plot that
forward, we can see we are currently
well below that trend. Similarly, if we
take a look at the trend from 1980 to
2000, we can see that we're absolutely
nowhere near that trend as things really
started to take a turn in 2000. And then
the trend from 2000 to 2020, we're
pretty much right along that trend even
though we dipped below it a couple of
times, we've mashed back up along that
trend line. Now, non-farm payrolls are
not the only way to measure employment,
and they're not even the best. We also
want to take into consideration the US
unemployment rate, which specifically
measures people who were not employed
during the survey. They were available
for work during the survey, and they had
made at least one specific active effort
to find a job during 4 weeks prior to
the survey. Or they were temporarily
laid off and expecting to be recalled to
their job. And so this rise in just
unemployment is representing people who
have recently lost their jobs and or are
looking for work, but cannot find it.
This is helpful because it's
distinguishing from people who might
have just retired and decided, "Hey, I'm
no longer going actively seek to work."
These are people who need to work, but
as of right now cannot. This is the
long-term chart of the unemployment
rate, and you can see right now it's a
little over 4%, which is significantly
lower than where it was from about 1970
through about 2015, where it spent most
that time well above 5%. That one caveat
to this piece of data is that if
somebody looks for work for quite a bit
and they just can't find anything, they
might give up and now they are no longer
being counted in the unemployed cuz
they're no longer trying to get work
because they just think it's impossible
for me. And that's why this chart, which
is the labor force participation rate,
is so important. Labor force
participation rate measures the number
of people in the labor force as a
percentage of the civilian
non-institutional population. Now, it
looks like there was a drastic rise in
the labor force participation rate from
about 1965 through about 1999, when it
peaked, or maybe the exact peak was in
2000-2001. Either way, big rise in labor
force participation, and then really for
the last 26 years it's just been
steadily back on the decline, seemingly
headed back down to where it was. But
it's important to note the Y axis,
because this goes from the bottom of the
data to basically the top of the data.
That's only from 58% up to 68%. And so
if we were looking at this on a chart
that showed from 0 to 100%, the
fluctuation it would you barely be able
to tell. It would look like it's almost
a straight line. The difference between
pre-1965,
where the labor force participation rate
was just around 60%, 59%, to the peak in
1999, when it was at like 67% is not
that massive of a difference. A lot of
this can probably be explained by
demographics, population ages that were
rising into the workforce like boomers,
populations that are now leaving the
workforce like boomers. It might also
partially be explained by young
millennials and Gen Z who are not trying
to enter the workforce and are not
counted in the traditional jobs reports.
Now, when they do the study to figure
out what the labor force participation
rate really is, they are looking at
everybody who's either working or
actively looking for work. And that
means they are counting people who
worked at least 1 hour as a paid
employee, worked at least 1 hour in
their own business, which means that the
work must be for pay or for profit,
which means that technically speaking,
people who are like YouTubers,
TikTokers, drop shippers should be
counted in this data. But, when you look
at how they collect the data, they send
out a survey to about 60,000 eligible
households. Now, I don't know about you,
but I have never been contacted for this
survey or any other survey from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics or any other
government agency for that matter. With
such a small sample size relative to the
population of 300 million Americans,
it's reasonable to assume that it's
possible there may be some gaps in this
data. Now, I'd like to mention something
else about the labor force participation
rate and the number of people that are
working in a society. go back in time
even a couple hundred years, labor force
participation was basically 100%. If you
didn't work, you die. If you had kids
and they didn't work, you all die. So,
for most of human history, people lived
a subsistence level lifestyle just
trying to survive. And once a baby got
to the age where they could do anything
productive whatsoever, they were working
with their family for life or survival.
The labor force participation rate was
essentially 100% and life was miserable,
suffering, and then you died. And so,
this by itself going up does not
necessarily mean that we have an
improving quality of life. On the other
hand, let's imagine we push this to the
other end of the extreme and the labor
force participation rate were to be
zero. Imagine nobody worked and
everybody was still alive.
Because obviously you could have
everybody not working just by everybody
being dead. The only way to accomplish a
0% labor force participation rate and
everybody staying alive is if everybody
is just retired. We have some mechanism
by which all wealth that humans want and
need is generated magically for us and
we don't have to work any longer and
therefore humans choose not to work.
That would be like a utopia that is not
really possible because
the extent of human needs and wants is
limitless. But a 0% labor force
participation rate would actually
represent pure infinite wealth. So, you
might then from that approach look at a
declining labor force participation rate
and think, "Well, this is a good thing.
If we have fewer people working able to
produce enough wealth that everybody is
able to continue surviving and thriving,
then maybe that's actually a good
thing." And if we can get to the point
where there are fewer and fewer people
working, one person for a household of
four or five or six, and the labor force
participation rate drops to 30% or 25%
and that could be a very good thing. And
that is true, but it doesn't really
match how things work in the fiat world.
Because a big drop in labor force
participation rate where suddenly people
are out of work and are no longer able
to produce for themselves means that
something terrible has happened. A big
recession, a big global crash, something
is drastically reducing the quality of
life for everyone. And the fear is with
this recent drop that we are starting to
see, we are on the cliff of another one
of these events. Now, there are plenty
of catalysts that could cause something
like this to happen. Obviously, one that
everybody is watching is AI. Another
catalyst blowing up right now is private
credit. Another one that most people are
paying attention to right now is the oil
shock, stagflation, global war. So, you
know the number of risks just to your
portfolio, let alone your employment.
These risks are rising right now. That's
why on Wednesday, April 15th, just a
couple of days from now at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern time, I'm hosting a free live
Zoom call to cover something I call the
Black Swan Trade. This is a completely
unique strategy that allows you to
capitalize. This is a completely unique
strategy that allows you to profit from
market crashes and unexpected
geopolitical events. In fact, I've used
it in my own account to take home some
pretty big returns for myself, including
taking home a 1,793%
return in less than 11 days. And while
1,700% plus returns are the exception,
they are not the norm. On Wednesday, I'm
going to share everything that I've
learned with you. I'm even going to be
giving away a free copy of Nassim
Taleb's book, Swan, and it is a signed
copy. It is signed by Nassim Taleb
himself. I'm going to be giving it away
to a lucky winner on the call. So, if
you want a chance to win this book, make
sure you register. All you have to do is
click on the link in the description
below, attend the event, and you'll be
entered to win. Again, it's on
Wednesday, April 15th at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern. It's coming up in just a couple
of days, so don't forget to sign up now.
Attendance is completely free, but spots
are limited, so don't wait. Look forward
to seeing you there. Now, I mentioned
that in a fiat world, jobs numbers look
different and work different than if we
had sound money. That's because if you
look at what the Federal Reserve itself
is commanded to do by Congress, you can
find it in the Federal Reserve Reform
Act of 1977, you can see they actually
have three mandates given to them by
Congress, not two. The first one is to
promote effectively the goals of maximum
employment. Second one is stable prices.
And the third one is moderate long-term
interest rates. Now, we know the Federal
Reserve can only do things through
monetary policy. That is, changing
interest rates and changing their
balance sheet. In other words, changing
the cost of money so that banks can
print more of it or printing more of it
themselves. And so, when we see that the
Federal Reserve is charged with maximum
employment, that means continually
debasing the currency so that people
have to continue to work more and
longer. They're trying to get that labor
force participation rate to 100%, which
is like what I said, that is not a good
quality of life, forcing everybody to
always have to work simply by debasing
the money. The second one is stable
prices and again, we all know when they
say stable prices, they really mean
prices that go up by at least 2% per
year. And again, this is to make sure
maximum employment people stay working
forever. Both of these are to increase
the tax base to the maximum tax base
possible so the government can
continually extract more and more out of
the economy. And the last one is
moderate long-term interest rates so
that when the government runs out of
money to tax from the economy, they can
borrow even more on top of that. So, the
Federal Reserve's only goal here, given
them by Congress, is to make sure the
government can have as much purchasing
power as possible by taxing everybody as
much as possible and then borrowing as
much as possible on top of that. And so,
if we are to see a big drop-off
continuing from here in monthly job
creation, most people are not prepared
for that. People don't have the savings.
In fact, right now more than half of all
Americans are living paycheck to
paycheck. It was a survey from Navigator
Research that showed that 53% of
Americans feel they're behind on their
financial goals and 57% say they're
living paycheck to paycheck. And
whopping 72% of Gen Z say they're living
paycheck to paycheck and 65% of
Millennials said they are. And just in
case you think this is just an income
issue, it is not. Because of people who
are making $300,000
a year, 40% of them are living paycheck
to paycheck. This is showing that
financial strain is not confined to
low-income workers. Now, obviously, when
you get to that level of income and
you're still living paycheck to
paycheck, it is a skill issue. Maybe
it's a discipline issue. Who knows what
the problem is. It's It's on them. We
can't blame the government. We can't
blame the Fed for that one. But
nonetheless, there are a lot of people,
regardless of income levels, who if they
lose their job right now, they are
screwed. The economy is not robust
enough to handle something like a severe
recession, something like mass
unemployment. And despite the blowout
number for March, we are headed the
wrong direction. We've had blowout
numbers before, but the overall trend is
down, not up. Oh, and one more note
about this shocking 178,000 jobs added
in March, it's not all it seems. That's
because when you actually look at the
news release from the BLS themselves
about these jobs numbers, you can scroll
down to page two, and you can see that
healthcare added 76,000 jobs, of which
35,000
of them were simply employees in offices
of physicians returning from a strike.
So, those are not new jobs, they're just
people on strike going back to work.
Now, it's important to remember that
despite the fact that we might have some
terrible economic news coming out at any
point. We might have a recession. We
might have a massive market crash from
the current levels. For those who are
ready, crashes and recessions are where
fortunes are made. But, it's only for
those who are prepared with cash to buy,
or at least something that preserves its
purchasing power so you have dry powder.
It's one of the reasons why Berkshire
Hathaway has $370 billion worth of
reserves right now. Now, that doesn't
mean go all in in cash. That doesn't
mean sell everything. Number one,
because then if you're wrong, and things
don't crash from here, because most of
the time they don't, then you really
lose because you miss out on all the
upside. And even though Berkshire
Hathaway's cash on hand looks insane,
it's about 31% of their total assets. If
you've followed me for any length of
time, you know that I've said for a
while, I always like to keep about 30%
of my portfolio in reserves. Now, for
Berkshire Hathaway, that's going to be
T-bills. For me, I like about 20% gold,
5% Bitcoin, 5% cash and cash equivalents
like T-bills, high yield savings
accounts, money market funds, cash. But
that gives you dry powder to be able to
take advantage of when everything goes
on sale. And if you are prepared during
the hard times, that looks like
everything is on sale to you. If you're
not prepared, it looks like panic. And
you're the one selling assets at fire
sale prices just to survive. Don't do
that.