Gold's rise recently has been nothing
short of spectacular. In fact, it has
more than doubled in the last 2 years.
Unfortunately, historically, when gold
makes moves like this, empires have a
tendency to fall. So, why is gold making
these moves now? And what is it trying
to tell us about the current state of
the economy in the world? It's important
to note that central banks are some of
the major buyers of gold right now. And
that trend has been continuing for quite
some time. In fact, central banks have
been buying gold so much that gold
holdings are now a larger percentage of
foreign central bank reserves than US
treasuries are. As you can see from this
chart, treasury holdings as a percentage
of foreign central bank reserves have
been declining for quite some time now,
while gold has been rising. Now, the
last time we got a big rise in gold was
right before 2020. Starting in July of
2019, gold broke out from a year's long
channel and rallied all the way to
August of 2020. It's important to
remember that when gold began its rise
mid209, none of the money printing from
2020 had started yet. But gold has a
tendency to sniff out future monetary
policy, specifically the consequences of
that monetary policy. And if you had
been paying attention to gold, you would
have been positioned well for the
unprecedented level of inflation and
money printing that central banks were
about to unleash on the world. And it's
no coincidence that gold has the ability
to do this. And it's because the people
who make the monetary policy decisions,
central banks, are some of the main
buyers of gold. So it stands to reason
that large moves in gold would precede
large moves in monetary policy. But this
is something that has been taking place
for hundreds and even thousands of
years. This is not something that is
new. For example, take a look at this
chart which is the value of one gold
mark priced in paper marks during the
hyperinflation that took place in the
VHimar Republic in Germany. In other
words, this is the price of gold
relative to their fiat currency. You can
see it looks like a hockey stick. And
you may be able to see the similarities
in the shape of the chart when we look
at the price of gold in paper dollars,
our fiat currency. While the percentage
move is not as extreme, the shape is the
same. And as you'll see, this is the
central reason why large moves in gold
tend to correspond with falls in
empires. Because when a government
cannot control its spending and inflates
its money into oblivion, it destroys the
power it had to print the money that
people used in the first place. But it
doesn't mean that there's nothing that
you can do about it. For example, there
are trends that tend to appear across
markets that if you are aware of, you
can take advantage of that. For example,
large moves in commodities tend to take
place after large moves in gold. And
while we've seen some good performance
out of base metals, we haven't seen
anything like what we've seen in gold
yet. And the same thing can be said of
energy. While we've seen good
performance recently, we've only
recently broken out from the long-term
consolidation pattern. And the move in
gold would suggest that we have a long
way to go from here. And if you'd like
to know my exact strategy for how I'm
playing the commodities super cycle, I
am holding a free event this Sunday.
It's coming up depending on when you're
watching this. Maybe tonight. this
Sunday, February 22nd at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern time. It's completely free, but
spots are limited. So, do not wait
because this might be your last chance
to register. And I'm going to teach you
the strategy that I use that requires no
margin, no futures, no leveraging your
account for crazy risk or anything like
that. I've been using this strategy in
my own account to take home triple and
even some quadrupled digit returns
sometimes within a matter of months. And
on this call, I'm going to teach you
everything that I know. I'm looking for
a small group of 250 traders that I can
take under my wing for the next year to
walk you through the strategy. Trade
with me as this commodity super cycle
plays out. So, if that sounds like
something that you're interested in
learning more about, do not miss out on
this call. Again, it is free. Spots are
limited. You have to click on the link
in the description below to register and
I hope to see you there. So, the
explosion of the price of gold in the
Vimar Republic in Germany is one extreme
example, but like I said, it's not the
only one. In fact, if we flip this
upside down, really what you're looking
at is a loss in purchasing power of
their fiat currency. And while it is not
nearly as quick, we've seen the same
thing happen with the US dollar over the
last 100 years. Because of the slow but
inevitable, spiritc crushing inflation
the government has imposed on American
citizens, the dollar's purchasing power
is less than 90% of what it used to be.
And this exact same thing has been
happening for thousands of years.
Consider what caused the decline of the
Roman Empire. This is a chart that shows
the silver content in coins in the Roman
Empire. And you can see steadily but
surely, Roman emperors continued to
decrease the amount of silver in their
coins. Keep in mind, this isn't the
silver that was getting less valuable.
This was the coins that were getting
less valuable. the same amount of silver
could still purchase the same amount of
stuff. But you needed more coins minted
by the government by the emperor in
order to buy the same stuff because they
had less real money in it. Just like
today, the money created by the
government gets less valuable. And so
you need more government money to equal
the same amount of gold. Same story,
different emperor. Now, historians like
to point to all sorts of other reasons
for the decline of the Roman Empire, the
decline of the VHimar Republic in
Germany, or any other examples when this
has happened throughout history. But the
reason why governments decide to debase
their money is because it's a shortterm
pain-free solution, even though it has
long-term consequences. governments get
themselves into a position where they
have promised to pay people money to
give people free things and it is too
politically unpopular to say, "Hey,
guess what? We actually can't afford
it." But it's also too politically
unpopular for the government to say,
"Okay, if we're going to do that, we
have to take money directly from other
people." And so they try and go the free
lunch route where they say, "We're not
going to take any more in taxes, and
we're still going to give everything we
promised. We're just going to do it by
debasing the money." And most people are
too financially illiterate to realize
they're still paying for it just through
higher prices. And guess what? The US
government is in the exact same
situation today. Most people are aware
that the national debt is well over $ 38
trillion. And budget estimates now show
that the US government will probably run
234 trillion deficits in perpetuity from
here. The national debt could exceed $60
trillion within the next 10 years. But
that's not even the biggest bad number
here. The Congressional Budget Office
estimates that the US will have $120
trillion in unfunded liabilities in just
30 years. The obligations to pay for
things like Medicare, Medicaid, Social
Security, and military spending exceed
all the abilities for the US government
to pay for it honestly through taxes.
And because you cannot borrow your way
out of a debt problem, you can only
borrow your way further into a larger
debt problem. It means this is going to
be funded through inflation. That means
debt monetization. That means the
government looks like they're borrowing
money, but they're borrowing it from the
central bank, the money printer. And
because there's no chance of a balanced
budget or especially a budget surplus,
there's no chance of the spending
slowing down. And there's no chance of
anybody ever proposing or voting for
cuts to spending because the people who
receive money from the government like
the military-industrial complex, big
pharma and seniors will never vote for
that. It means they're going to try and
deal with it through inflation. It means
they're going to try and deal with it
the way that Rome did or the way that
the Vimma Republic in Germany did. Now,
the next phase of this is what the
current move in gold is sniffing out.
Again, gold is up over 150% in the last
2 years alone. With central banks being
some of the major buyers and central
banks being the policy decision makers,
we know gold is telling us something
about the near future, not something a
100red years down the road. I believe
that the next chairman of the Federal
Reserve, Kevin Marsh, is going to be
instrumental in this next phase and that
is deregulating the banks because it
will be politically unpopular for the
Federal Reserve itself to go back into
massive quantitative easing, debt
monetization, blowing up its balance
sheet, buying a bunch of US treasuries.
But if they can get the banks to do it
instead, 99% of people will have no idea
that it's virtually the exact same
thing. And the reality is it's just one
regulation change that needs to take
place for banks to do QE for the Fed.
Without getting too technical, it's
something called the supplementary
leverage ratio that tells banks they
cannot buy more than a certain number of
US treasuries. All they have to do is
remove that restriction and banks can go
crazy buying as many US treasuries as
they want. And we know this is true
because this actually happened before in
2020. The Federal Reserve temporarily
removed that restriction and banks did
what they were expected to do. They went
and bought a bunch of US treasuries. Now
that was temporary, but they can do it
again and they can do it permanently
this time. Which means that if you are
not prepared for prices to run hot, I'm
talking cost of living and I'm also
talking assets, then you might be left
behind. Gold makes moves like this when
it is running in front of major monetary
policy decisions. The big boys have
protected themselves, but the good news
is even if you missed out on that move
in gold, the rest of the market is
probably about to follow, especially
things like commodities and materials
and rare earths and energy. And again,
if you'd like to follow along with me
and learn my exact strategy for how I
have been playing this commodity super
cycle and how I think it's going to play
out for the coming quarters and coming
year, then please don't forget to
register for my event. I don't know when
the next time is that I'm going to run
one of these. It's coming up this
Sunday, 700 p.m. Eastern time, February
22nd. Register for it and I will see you
there. Link is in the description below.
As always, thank you so much for
watching. Have a great day.