I'm old enough to remember when
everybody expected the current
administration would be cutting spending
and ending wars. Yet, here we are with a
monster proposal to increase the
military budget by about 50% with a new
$2.2 trillion budget proposal. If
enacted, this budget proposal will
increase spending, widen the deficit,
and accelerate the growth of our already
spiraling national debt. Because if
there's anything you can trust the
government will always do, it's spend
more of your money and start more wars.
But, you know, as they say, if all you
have is a stone, everything looks like
two birds. This new budget proposal for
2027, it requests $1.5 trillion
for defense, which is about 50% more
than the trillion dollars they had for
2026. Breakdown is $1.1 trillion in base
discretionary spending for the DOD. Are
we still calling it the Department of
Defense or the Department of War? It
also includes another 350 billion for
mandatory spending, and then there's a
potential $200 billion Pentagon
supplemental package. And that would be
on top of this request as US carries out
its war in Iran. Now, the one thing that
I am not seeing about this proposal is
anybody wondering how they're going to
spend this money, which is a stark
difference from just a couple of months
ago, the first time this budget was
proposed. Because if you take a look at
news headlines from February of just
this year, everybody was talking about
how officials underneath the Trump
administration were literally scrambling
trying to figure out what to do with a
proposed $1.5 trillion defense budget.
They said the military literally has no
idea what it would do with that much
money. This was sources who spoke
anonymously to characterize internal
matters. So, I guess their solution to
wanting to spend more money for the
military, but everybody realizing we
don't really have anything to spend that
money on, was, all right, I guess we'll
just have to go start a war. Because now
with this budget proposal, we are seeing
none of that. Now, it's worth noting the
US government doesn't have this money.
They have no money at all. And every
dollar they spend, they are taking from
us one way or another, either directly
through taxation or indirectly through
inflation. This is how spending works.
We're looking at the numbers for 2025.
We can see they spent a little over $7
trillion.
5.23 trillion of that was what they call
revenue, which is just money they took
directly from us, from our paycheck in
taxes. That's not enough to satisfy
their endless desire to spend, and so
they spent an additional $1.78 trillion
on top of that, which we call the
deficit. And that is financed by
borrowing. And given the fact that this
borrowing is never actually paid back,
it's only paid back by taxing and
borrowing more in the future, cuz that
national debt number just keeps on
driving higher, that means that this is
new money coming into existence. That
means that instead of taking those
dollars directly from us for spending,
from our paychecks in taxes, they're
funding this through inflation. That
means every dollar you do keep is worth
less, so they can either extract dollars
directly from you or extract purchasing
power from your remaining dollars.
Either way, the amount that they spend
is the real amount they take from the
economy. Now, if we take a look at where
the deficit lies right now, as of
February of 2026, it's worth noting that
the deficit is currently on track to be
lower than it was in 2025. At this point
in 2025, the deficit was at 1.147
trillion. And right now, the deficit's
only at 1.005
trillion. But now it seems like it's
only a matter of time before they exceed
and maybe even break new records. We're
actually right along line with the 2021
deficit chart, which ended fiscal year
2021 at a $2.77
trillion deficit. Now, we probably won't
get that bad, but who knows. Here's a
chart of what the federal deficit or
surplus looks like month-to-month, and
you can see sometimes the federal
government does actually run a surplus,
but really that's usually only when the
taxes come in. So, for that month, they
bring in more taxes than they spend.
But, when we switch this chart to
quarterly to smooth out that monthly
variation, we can see that usually
they're running a deficit. And when we
show the annual numbers instead, we can
see that the last time we ran a surplus
for an entire year was actually 2001.
And while there is variation in the
deficit, sometimes gets better,
sometimes gets a lot worse, the overall
trend is that the deficit just continues
to get worse. Now, you might be looking
at that chart and thinking, "Hey, well,
the raw dollar numbers don't really mean
anything because they're continually
printing so much money and the size of
the economy is growing that we need to
look at this in relative terms to the
size of the economy to know whether
things are actually getting worse." Good
idea. So, let's look at the deficit as a
percent of GDP. You can see Oh, yep,
actually same exact picture. If you take
a look at the percentage that this
proposed budget would be spending on
defense compared to everything else, you
can see this last bar here is the
proposed defense spending, and it is the
highest percentage spent on defense
going back all the way to Reagan. Now,
many people do make the argument that
even if you want a smaller government,
you want the majority of what they are
doing and spending money on to be
defense because the argument goes that
is one thing that is very difficult,
sometimes maybe even impossible, to
privatize. But, having a larger
percentage of the budget spent on
defense, that argument only works if the
spending is actually going down, not if
the overall spending is going up. And
it's telling that this proposal did not
include 10-year projections for how this
spending plan would impact future
deficits because it's going to blow them
up. And that's because it doesn't
account for the entitlement spending
that are part of the mandatory budget
like Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid. And by the way, Social
Security is bankrupt. There's less money
going into the Social Security fund than
is getting paid out, which means when it
runs out in 6 to 8 years, which it will,
either benefit payouts are going to be
cut or taxes on everybody else are going
to go up or they're going to inflate
away the difference. In any of those
three situations, somebody is getting
the short end of the stick. And I'll
give you a hint, it's going to be us,
not the government. No matter what, we
are going to foot the bill.
>> And one of the ways that this proposal
aims to pay for the increase in defense
spending would be cuts to departments
like Department of the Interior, Housing
and Urban Development, Health and Human
Services. And you can see on this chart
here which areas would receive more
funding and which areas would receive
less funding. Again, I'm all for less
government involvement, less government
spending, fewer government programs
because everything they touch gets
worse. But it really does no good to cut
a little bit in some areas and then add
a lot to another area. Now, the final
kicker here is that because this will
increase the deficit, this increases
their borrowing needs. And we already
know the federal government is having a
hard time borrowing everything it needs
to, especially if they're trying to
borrow for the long end of the curve,
meaning they're trying to borrow using
10 or 20 or 30-year Treasuries. So far,
they've been leaning on the short end of
the curve because there's more demand
for that kind of debt. I'd rather loan
to the government for 1 year or 2 years
rather than 10, 20, or 30 years. But
even that seems to be having trouble now
with just last week, the 2-year Treasury
yield surged after really bad US bond
auction. And this is for the 2-year,
which is supposed to have some of the
best liquidity and some of the most
demand. The 2-year Treasury yield jumped
more than nine bips on Tuesday to 3.925%
and it was only a $69 billion auction.
The bid-to-cover ratio on that auction
was only 2.44, which is the smallest
bid-to-cover since May of 2024. Now,
this can get a little bit technical, but
the way that US Treasury auctions work
is that there are certain number of
dollars lined up at the auction to
participate and buy those bonds.
Institutional money has the choice to
say, "I'm just going to buy those bonds
at whatever interest rate the government
is offering." Or they can say, "Nah, I
would rather only lend to the government
if I can get a specific interest rate or
better." If there's a really large bid
to cover, that means there's a lot of
money lining up, which means the US
government is probably going to get the
interest rate that they want because
there's enough money lined up. When
there's a really small bid to cover
ratio, like 2.44, that means that the
government might burn through all the
dollars that are lined up at whatever
interest rate they offer, and then they
have to start paying a higher and higher
interest rate. And the key thing with
this is, if they have to pay a higher
rate on that auction because they get to
the last dollar in line and they're
asking for a higher rate, they actually
have to take that and pay that to
everybody. having a very small bid to
cover ratio is a very bad thing, very
bad sign, and it means lack of demand
for US government treasuries. Not a good
thing when you're trying to expand the
spending, blow up the deficit, and
borrow a crazy ton of debt. This is one
of the reasons why if you watch the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet, it has
been increasing over the last couple of
months. You can see as of April 1st, it
again grew because the Federal Reserve
is doing QE again. There's simply not
enough dollars in the system for people
to have the demand to lend to the US
government at the rate that they want to
borrow. The Fed has to step in and print
up the difference. You probably know
where I'm going next with this, but they
don't want to continue to be in this
business, which is why I think by the
end of this year at the latest, we are
going to see bank deregulation so that
banks can pick up the slack here. Right
now, banks are limited from regulations
on how much money they can lend to the
US government and how much money they
can lend to the private sector. They're
actually required to buy treasuries, but
they're penalized for doing so. Bank
deregulation would mean banks can lend
an unlimited amount to the US
government. That pushes yields lower. It
provides all of those newly printed
dollars by the banks lending that money
into existence that the government
wants, and it doesn't hit the risk
limits at the banks so that they can
take more money and lend it out into the
private sector for productivity gains.
So, we'll see if this actually happens,
but as of right now, something's got to
give because the government just wants
to spend more and more money to fund
these endless wars, and there's just not
enough money in the system for them to
do that. The liquidity's got to come
from somewhere, either from the banks or
from the Fed. And if it doesn't happen
quick enough, then we could see some
crazy market action in the coming
months. Now, if you're interested in
what I'm going to be doing to prepare
for this, stay tuned. I've got something
I'm coming out with later, so check in
on my later videos so that you can find
out more. As always, thank you so much
for watching. Have a great day.