Treasury market looks ready to break,
and when it does, here's what you should
expect will happen. Right now, as of the
time of this recording, gold is on the
brink of breaking $5,000 per ounce.
Given the fact that gold has acted as a
monetary asset for thousands of years,
and is still today by central banks and
large funds around the world. This is a
sign that more and more are putting
their trust and faith in the safe haven
asset, the safe haven asset, rather than
something like the dollar or treasuries,
which have acted temporarily as a safe
haven asset for the last few decades.
Compared to world history, this is a
blip on the radar. But, it's not just
gold signaling a problem here. We're
also seeing traditional assets like
stocks continue to push to all-time
highs. You know, many people are worried
about bubbles in real estate, bubbles in
crypto, bubbles in stocks, bubbles all
over the place. But, the thing is, if
everything is a bubble, nothing is.
Maybe it's not that the assets are in a
bubble, maybe it's a problem with the
denominator. Maybe your measuring stick
is shrinking. Maybe the dollar is
exhibiting signs of weakness. Now, it's
true that the dollar index over the last
couple of years has been moving somewhat
lower. But, the dollar index is simply a
measure of the dollar versus other
currencies. If you want a sign of true
weakness or strength in the dollar, you
have to look at the other things that
you can compare it against, namely the
things that you purchase with it. And
whether we're looking at pretty much any
asset class, or whether we're looking at
the cost of living through things like
housing, transportation, or food, the
dollar is getting much, much weaker. And
that is a problem because it has been
making borrowing in those dollars for
the government more and more expensive.
You see, the reason why the dollar is
getting weaker compared to all the stuff
that we care about, like assets and
goods, is because so many more of them
are continuing to come into existence.
Money supply keeps on it making new
all-time highs. As new money comes into
existence, it bids up the prices of
everything because you have more money
chasing the same amount of goods and
services. Now, obviously, we still have
growing goods and services. Production
increases over time. But, if the money
supply grows faster than the supply of
all the stuff, then the stuff will get
more expensive. This also means that if
you want to borrow those dollars, it
will be more expensive to do so. You
see, if I'm going to lend you $100, and
in a year you're going to pay me back a
1% interest rate, I'm going to get $101
back from you. That sounds fine. I'm
going to have a 1% interest rate. But,
over that same time period, let's say
the cost of living increases by 5%,
which means I used to be able to go out
to dinner for $100. Now, it's going to
cost me $105 to get the exact same
dinner. Well, I'm no longer going to be
willing to lend you money at 1% anymore.
I'm going to demand at least 5% cuz
otherwise, in real terms, I'm losing.
That is exactly why borrowing for the US
government has been getting more and
more expensive because lenders are not
willing to part with their dollars for
10, 20, 30 years unless they believe
they are being compensated for that loss
of purchasing power. Now, you might take
a look at something like short-term
treasuries and notice that it's gotten a
lot cheaper for the government to
borrow. And that is specifically because
of the Federal Reserve. The Federal
Reserve controls the Fed funds rate,
which is the interest rate that banks
earn or get charged to lend money to
each other overnight. And when the
Federal Reserve pushes that interest
rate lower, it helps suppress other
interest rates that are close to that
along the yield curve. In other words,
if the overnight rate goes down to 1%,
then that will cause the six-month rate
or the one-year rate to also go down.
Not as much, but somewhat. However, if
the overnight rate goes up to 10%, well,
the other rates will also go up. Again,
maybe not as much, but it has an
influence, which is why the government
can borrow for six months at a much
lower rate now because the Federal
Reserve had been lowering interest
rates. But again, it's been having the
opposite effect on the longer end of the
curve, as we can see with the 10-year
yield. And as an inverse to yields, we
can see the price of bonds has been
going down, which has caused bond funds
like TLT to also go down. And if you
look more closely at the 10-year yield,
you can see recently it's been getting
higher quickly, and it looks like it's
about to break out. Now, there are a
couple of reasons for this. Number one
is future inflation expectations.
Because right now, inflation may be
temporarily suppressed. But, given the
rate of government borrowing and
spending and the money supply increase,
and the expectations on how much that
might impact growth, lenders are
demanding more and more to lock their
money up for longer and longer. And we
can see this clearly when we take a look
at the composition of the national debt.
The government has been forced to borrow
more and more with short-term debt, and
they're just not able to find enough
borrowers at the long end. To take a
look at the national debt broken down by
type, we can see that only 17% of the
national debt is currently held in
bonds. Bonds are the 30-year treasuries
and the 20-year treasuries. And we can
see that 50% of the national debt is in
notes. Notes are 2-year, 3-year, 5-year,
7-year, and 10-year. And now, 21% of the
national debt is in bills. Bills are
short-term from 4-week maturity up to
52-week maturity. So, almost 72% of the
entire national debt is held at the
short end of the curve, maturing in
under 10 years. And increasingly
frequently, more and more of that is at
2 years or less. Obviously, we hear
stories all the time of different
organizations, funds, or countries
moving away from investing in US
treasuries.
Just recently, it was announced that a
Danish pension fund would be selling off
its entire treasury holding. Treasury
Secretary Scott Bessent said that
Denmark's investment in the US Treasury
bonds, like Denmark itself, is
irrelevant. And amount-wise, he's right.
It is true. It is irrelevant to the size
of the US Treasury market. But, it's
also true that this is a signpost. It's
a little signal, and we keep on seeing
more and more of these. The biggest one
I mentioned earlier is simply gold
accumulation. And as you can see, just
recently, official reserves of US debt
have now been overtaken by reserves held
in gold. This is not something that
happens overnight, but it is something
that is happening. So, what will happen
when interest rates break out to the
upside, and the US government cannot
find enough lenders to borrow at the
rates that it needs to afford? It will
go to the place it always does, the
printer. Although it may look
differently this time. Federal Reserve
historically has done quantitative
easing whenever the US government needs
it to buy more of its debt. And just
recently, the Federal Reserve started
increasing its balance sheet yet again,
as you can see at the end of this chart.
They are buying treasuries once again
because nobody else is stepping up to
the plate. But, given what happened the
last time the Fed did a huge round of
QE, this would be very unpopular for
them to come right out and start buying
up a bunch of US government debt again,
which means the next time this happens
and accelerates, it's probably going to
come from the banks. Governor Moran at
the Federal Reserve has talked about
this extensively in speeches and reports
that you can find on the Fed's website,
basically saying that we need to free up
banks' balance sheets so that they can
buy more US treasuries. Right now, banks
are restricted in the number of US
treasuries they can buy because of
something called the supplementary
leverage ratio. That was temporarily
suspended back in 2020 and allowed banks
to buy as many treasuries as they
wanted, and they did. But, that
suspension was only temporary, and the
amount of treasuries that they can own
now is restricted again. And the
argument is they need to be deregulated
permanently so that they can go out
there and buy as many treasuries as they
want. And the thing is, they will
because they're using your money to do
it. So, they don't care that they're
only getting 4.2% or if they're able to
drive rates lower, they won't care if
they're only getting 3 and 1/2% or 3%.
All they care about is the difference
between what they get from the
government and what they have to pay you
because they're not using their money,
they're using yours. So, if they're
getting 3 and 1/2% from government
treasuries, they'll pay you 0.3% or 0.1%
or maybe nothing. And the only thing
holding them back from doing this right
now is the law. And that law will likely
change as soon as the government needs
it to. So, treasury yields look ready to
break out to the upside, which means
temporarily looks like treasuries are
ready to break out to the downside. And
when they do, it's likely that banks
will be unleashed to buy them all up and
earn an unlimited, an infinite return
using your money. And when this happens,
brace for impact because the inflation
this might unleash could be severe. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.