There seems to be a lot of confusion out
there about exactly how much money
tariffs have been bringing in to the
United States so far. And it's not your
fault because the numbers that are being
thrown around are entirely and widely
inaccurate. So, let's take a look at the
real numbers, the actual data about how
much money tariffs have been bringing
in. First chart I want you to look at is
a year-to-date chart. This chart shows
how much tariff revenue the United
States has brought in so far in this
calendar year, and it also compares that
to prior years at the exact same time.
You can see at the bottom of this chart
we have 2022, 23, 24, 25, and they're
all right in line with each other. There
is virtually no significant difference
in the amount of tariff revenue brought
in for all those years. However, you can
see at the very top of the chart we have
2026. And as of January 23rd, 2026, the
US has brought in over $7 billion
in tariff revenue. It's well over triple
what was brought in in any year prior.
So, it is a fact that the United States
is bringing in much more tariff revenue,
both as a percent and as a raw dollar
amount, than any other year. Now, if we
look back at last year, the entire year
in 2025, we can also see it was a
monster year in terms of tariff revenue.
$288 billion
was the total collected tariff revenue.
You can see that dwarfs every prior year
in comparison, with the largest prior
year being 2022 with a 115 billion
dollars in tariff revenue. Compared to
prior years, on average, 2025 brought in
about three times as much money in
tariffs, which is a big jump. So, how
does this big jump in tariff revenue
compare to everything else that the US
government takes in taxes? Cuz remember,
tariffs are a tax. The definition of a
tax is money the government charges from
you to do something, whether that is to
own property, to buy or sell goods, to
earn income, to sell an asset, or to buy
something from another country, it's a
tax. If we take a look at how much money
the US government has taken in tariffs
compared to all tax revenue, we can see
that prior years it was very steadily in
between 2% and 3%. However, starting in
April of 2025, the percentage of tariff
revenue started to climb. And tariffs at
the end of 2025 ended up being a
whopping 3.72%
of all collected tax revenue. But over
here at the top left of the chart, you
can see a line that looks like an error
on this chart, just hovering there in
the middle of nowhere. And that's
because tariffs were in full effect
already, starting in fiscal year 2026.
Which means that as of December of 2025,
which is 3 months into the fiscal year
of 2026, tariffs had made up a whopping
7.35%
of total collected tax revenue. Now,
this number will certainly go down after
April of 2026, because that's when all
of the regular tax revenue comes in, or
the largest chunk of it. However, 2026
will almost certainly represent a year
in which tariff revenue makes up a
record percentage of all tax revenue the
federal government collects, beating out
the last record of 2025 at 3.72%. Okay,
but now for the hard news. 4, 5, 6, 7%
is almost meaningless. If the number of
dollars that you paid in taxes went down
by 7% as a result of this, it would make
very little difference in your life. And
that is a false if, because your tax
payments are not going down as a result
of tariffs. The government isn't
changing its spending, its borrowing,
and its taxing as a result of this. So,
this isn't lowering your tax bill. This
is just extra money the government has
started taxing. And it's still only 7%.
Even if you have a relatively large
income compared to the rest of the US
population, and you earned a couple
hundred thousand dollars in 2025, your
total federal tax bill, let's say, was a
hundred thousand dollars. A reduction of
7% means you would have saved seven
thousand dollars. Now, seven thousand
dollars is not nothing, but for somebody
who's already paying a hundred thousand
dollar tax bill, that extra seven grand
is not going to meaningfully change
their life. Similarly, if you have a
much lower income, and you paid a total
of ten thousand dollars in federal
taxes, and you were able to get a
reduction of seven hundred dollars,
again, not going to change your life.
So, while tariff revenue does make up 7%
of current tax revenue so far for fiscal
year 2026, which is a record compared to
past years, it's not even a drop in the
bucket. It doesn't move the needle. It
doesn't change anything about your life.
And even if it did result in a
dollar-for-dollar reduction in the
amount of taxes you were going to pay,
which it won't, but even if it did, it
still wouldn't make a difference in your
life. But most importantly, it's not
making a difference in what the US
government is doing. Not only is there
no reduction in the amount of money that
the government is taking from you in
taxes, and not only is there no
reduction in the total amount of money
the US government is spending, but this
extra tariff revenue is still not even
making a dent in the actual deficit,
which is the amount that the government
has to borrow because they're spending
so much after they take everything from
you in taxes. Year-to-date, they've
already racked up a six hundred billion
dollar deficit, which is right in line
with the deficit during prior years at
this time. So, comparing the current
tariff revenue to tariff revenue from
past years is irrelevant. So, the
questions that people should be asking,
the questions that actually matter are,
is the government taking less money from
you in taxes because of the tariffs? No.
Is the government spending less money
because of the tariffs? No. Is the
government borrowing less money because
of the tariffs? No. The tariff revenue
is not making any meaningful change to
how much the government takes from you
and how much the government spends. And
guess what? It's not even possible for
that to happen. Because if tariffs were
raised to the point that it could
meaningfully reduce the deficit, reduce
the spending, reduce how much the
government takes from you in taxes, what
would end up happening far before that
point is that imports would basically go
to zero. Because fiscal policy changes
behavior. Taxes disincentivize behavior.
The reason why the US government has
taxes on things like alcohol and
cigarettes is to discourage people from
buying those things, to make it harder,
make it more expensive. The reason why
people who have the ability to choose
don't take their wealth in terms of
earned income is because earned income
is discouraged by punishing it through
taxes. And so if buying stuff from
overseas was so punished so highly that
it became so expensive that it could
make a dent in the budget, people would
not buy stuff from overseas anymore. And
they would buy it domestically. And I
know there's a lot of you who think that
would be a great thing. But the reason
why people buy stuff from other people
in other countries right now is because
it's cheaper. The definition of wealth
is being able to afford the stuff we
want and need. And so if you can buy
something for $100, that is better for
you than buying the same thing for
$1,000. When prices are lower, that
means you can afford more of the stuff
you want and need. And so by the
government coming in and artificially
imposing extra prices to say no, you
can't get that cheap thing anymore for
how much it really costs, we're going to
make it so much more expensive that you
have to get it from somebody else who
can't make it that cheaply, you have to
pay more for it, that makes your life
worse, not better. And sure, it might
make the lives of domestic producers of
certain things better because they are
now artificial winners that the
government has chosen by decree. But
that is not better for everybody. That
is cronyism. It's the same thing that
results in military contractors being
artificially wealthier because the
government chose them. Or Big Pharma
being artificially wealthier because the
government chose them. It's cronyism. It
is corruption. It is not free markets
and it does not result in greater
wealth, greater equality, or better
growth. It harms those things. We need
less government, less intervention, and
fewer taxes everywhere. And that's not
going to be accomplished by trying to
make this number go higher on the chart.
So, the net result of tariffs 1 year in
are that life is slightly worse for
everybody overall. And let's just hope
it stops there. As always, thank you so
much for watching. Have a great day.