There's one thing the market does not
like, that's uncertainty. And if there
is one thing that this new Federal
Reserve led by Kevin Warsh is giving to
the market, it's uncertainty, which is
why we are seeing the 10-year yield on
US government Treasuries on the verge of
breaking out and trading around levels
not seen since 2004 through 2007. And
the picture looks even worse for the
30-year with the breakout having already
taken place, the yield up at 5.26%
and trading in ranges we last saw in the
late '90s, early 2000s. In other words,
it looks like the market simply does not
believe the Federal Reserve is going to
do what it says it's going to do. And
most importantly, what it says it's
going to do more adamantly than it's
been saying in years, maybe decades. It
has been so long since the Federal
Reserve outright came and said,
"Inflation is too high and we are
absolutely committed to bringing
inflation down." In fact, for the first
time ever in the FOMC statement, we got
an outright declaration that just says
the committee will deliver price
stability. He's elaborated on this
multiple times in multiple ways. They're
not just looking for tiny little
changes. They're not looking for just
changes in the trend. They're looking
for the overall number to get smashed
down. But, it seems like the market just
doesn't think he's going to do anything
about it or at least is not doing
anything significant about it yet, which
is why long-term yields have spiked
recently. But, what is the relationship
there? Let's say you believe that over
the next 30 years the inflation rate is
going to be 4% on average. It means if
you're going to lend money for the next
30 years, you need to get at least 4%
interest just for you to break even on
your purchasing power, which means
you're probably going to demand 5 or 6%
on that loan. And that's exactly why
mortgage rates are going up right now,
because mortgage lenders saying, "Hey,
we're giving you money for 30 years. We
want to make sure that we're not losing
purchasing power. And because inflation
is going back up again, so are the
interest rates that we're going to
charge on lending. However, the FOMC
decided that they were going to maintain
the Fed funds rate in the target range
that it sits at right now, 3 and 1/2% to
3 and 3/4%, which means they didn't hike
interest rates. And even further than
that, if you take a look into the
implementation notes, you can see two
things. Number one, they are continuing
to take all of the principal payments
from the Federal Reserve's holdings of
mortgage back securities, and they're
rolling that into Treasury bills. So
right now on the Fed's balance sheet,
they hold primarily two categories of
assets. They have mortgage back
securities, and they have Treasuries. As
those mortgage back securities get paid
back to them, they're not just
reinvesting that into new mortgage back
securities like they used to. They're
taking that off the table, out of the
playing field, but they're sending it
into Treasuries. They're buying
Treasuries with that. Hey, real quick,
if you are an active investor and your
portfolio's not growing as fast as you'd
like, then I would like to give you a
free gift. This is something I've been
working on for a long time. My team and
I put together a portfolio stress test.
We looked at the top six risks that
people are exposed to in their
portfolios many times without even
knowing it. And most importantly, what
you can do to fix it. So we built this
really cool questionnaire quiz on my
website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So no matter what is holding
your portfolio back and no matter what
risks you're exposed to, maybe without
even knowing it, I want to help you find
and fix your vulnerabilities. Again,
completely free. Once you go through
this little 1-minute questionnaire on my
website, it's going to send you a
customized blueprint to your email PDF
you can download and you can keep it
forever. And that's going to give you
access to all of my courses. I've
created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you, you can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. If you'd like
to take advantage of this, all you have
to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. So this is what their total
balance sheet looks like and you can see
just over the last 8 months or so their
balance sheet has been growing again.
But that's not because they're buying
mortgage-backed securities. If you take
a look just at their holdings of
mortgage-backed securities, you can see
it's been steadily declining since it
topped out in 2022. They're continuing
to roll mortgage-backed securities off
their balance sheet and allegedly they
want to bring this number down to zero.
However, this is the chart that shows
the Federal Reserve's holdings of
treasuries. And if we zoom in on just
the last year, you can see that their
treasury holdings have been
accelerating. And if we look again at
their implementation notes, we can see
that not only is that because they're
taking all the money paid back to them
from mortgage-backed securities and
they're buying T-bills with it, but they
are also just outright buying more
treasury bills and other treasury
securities that are 3 years to maturity
or less in order to maintain an ample
reserve level in the banking system. And
so even though the mortgage-backed
securities continue to bleed off their
balance sheet, the overall balance sheet
is still growing simply because they are
buying so many more treasuries now. So
not only are they doing QE, they say
this is to maintain reserve levels in
the banking system and fine, that may be
the reason for it. But QE by any other
name is still QE. They are purchasing
assets. And so they are holding interest
rates steady while they are still doing
QE at the short end of the curve. As
result of this, the market so far is
acting like they do not believe the
Federal Reserve that the Fed is going to
get a handle on inflation despite how
much Kevin Warsh keeps saying they're
going to do it. And so all short-term
interest rates have stayed largely the
same over the past couple of months,
mainly because that is tied a lot more
heavily to the federal funds rate and
because of all of the QE the Fed is
doing at that short end, we're seeing a
massive steepening in the curve with the
long end rising dramatically. Because
this one is much more controlled by the
free market, by free market participants
who can buy and sell and not have that
price manipulated so much by a
price-insensitive buyer that can print
money to buy whatever they want. Now,
ironically, one of the impacts of this
is that the market is kind of doing the
tightening for the Fed. Because when
long-term interest rates rise, that
makes it harder to borrow. It makes it
more expensive and harder to borrow for
mortgages, for business loans, for auto
loans, for corporate financing. The
10-year Treasury yield is like the
baseline for debt markets around the
world and the higher the yield goes on
that, the more expensive all borrowing
costs across the board get. And so while
the traditional narrative is that the
dominant force from this is demand
destruction, which should hypothetically
bring down inflation, really in reality
this also has an effect of the opposite
side of the coin, which is production
destruction. Because when everybody is
leveraged, especially large
corporations, and then interest rates go
up, it gets harder and harder and more
and more expensive to finance new
production. And when the production of
new goods and services gets more
expensive, you can't produce as much.
And so while demand does go down, so
does production. Now, the other thing
that's contributing to uncertainty that
the market does not like is because the
Fed is giving signals that they're going
to be communicating less. First of all,
Kevin Warsh is considering reducing the
frequency of their scheduled policy
meeting. We may not get the
FOMC meetings on the regular schedule
like we've gotten for so long. He's
signaled in the past that they might
just reduce the meetings and the press
conferences to when anything meaningful
or significant is happening. No reason
to talk about stuff if you're not going
to be making changes. He doesn't want to
signal to the market what they might be
thinking about that what they might be
doing in the future. He is saying, "We
want to let the market do what the
market's going to do based on everything
happening in the market and not try and
anticipate what we're doing." And so,
why would we have a meeting when there's
nothing going on? But, the reality is
the Federal Reserve controls the market
or at least it exerts such a large
amount of influence on the market that
that creates a lot of uncertainty. If
you want the market to set market prices
based on what's happening in the market,
you can't have it both ways and also
control the price of money because at
the end of the day that's exactly what
setting interest rates does. Interest
rates are the cost of capital. It is
price controls on money. Nobody in their
right mind thinks that it would be a
good idea to have a committee of
unelected bureaucrats sit down and come
up with the price of gasoline, come up
with the price of bread, come up with
the price of milk. That's something the
free market should do based on supply
and demand. It gets the goods where they
need to go and it creates the fairest
distribution and most equal distribution
and fairest price through competition
and most access to everybody involved.
But, if you have somebody who comes in
and sets prices on the one commodity
that is the other side of every
transaction that happens, in this case
money, then you exert a large amount of
influence over the transactions of
everything across the entire economy.
So, you can't have your cake and eat it,
too, and say you want the market to just
respond to what the market is doing and
not pay attention to the one who's
actually setting the prices on half of
everything that is transacted in the
economy. The net result of trying to
have your cake and eat it, too, then is
just massive volatility where the market
doesn't know what to expect and every
time you have an action by the price
setter, the market goes crazy. Now, the
last reason why the Fed is not
communicating a lot of confidence to the
market about its competence at dealing
with inflation is because it's signaling
that inflation might actually be lower
than what everybody thinks it is.
They're indicating that they like to use
so-called trimmed mean measures, which
exclude outliers in price increases and
decreases. But we all know there's not
really a lot of outliers in price
decreases, and so the only thing you're
doing is reporting a rate of inflation
that is lower than what most people are
experiencing. A trimmed mean inflation
is kind of like a teacher grading a test
on a curve, which means that with the
Dallas measure, it removes 24% of the
lower end price readings and 31% of the
higher end price readings, which
obviously is going to result in an
inflation reading that is lower than
what the CPI is. Now, the most ironic
part about all of this is that if the
Federal Reserve does come out and do
like a surprise rate hike, maybe like a
half of a percent, because that is at
the short end of the curve, what could
happen as a result of that is a ton of
long-term bond buying. Because if
suddenly market participants think,
"Okay, the Fed is serious and they're
going to attack inflation when and if it
pops," then market participants might be
more willing to lend at longer-term
interest rates that are lower than what
they are right now. And so, while
holding interest rates steady has caused
long bond yields to surge, a rate hike
at the short end could cause long bond
yields to collapse. Do I think they're
going to do that? No idea. But at this
point, I wouldn't rule anything out,
especially some sort of financial
emergency happening somewhere in the
world, because 30-year yields above 5%,
20-year yields above 5%, 10-year yields
knocking on the door of 5% something
that the federal government wants or can
survive for a long extended period of
time. And so, at some point, something
is going to break. Something is going to
have to give. It's just a matter of
time. One last note, if you're an active
investor and your portfolio is not
growing as fast as you'd like, my team
and I put together a completely free
gift for you. It's called the portfolio
stress test. All you have to do is
answer some questions about your
portfolio and your investing goals, and
then it will email you a custom
blueprint that will help you fix the
vulnerabilities in your portfolio that
you maybe didn't even know were there.
It's also going to give you access to
all of my courses, hundreds of hours of
education, strategies, tactics on
investing and trading that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. Again, this
is all completely free stuff I used to
charge a lot of money for, your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
