If you're a high-income earner, or if
you are an investor sitting on some
unrealized gains, or especially if
you're both, then there's potentially
some good news waiting in the pipeline
for you right before the midterm
elections. Recently, President Trump
made a call for a capital gains tax cut
as a midterm boost. Right now, capital
gains are classified as either
short-term or long-term. Long-term is
defined as holding the asset for more
than 1 year before you sell it. However,
if you hold it for less than a year,
then your capital gain is classified as
short-term. Now, it's pretty
straightforward what your taxable rate
is if you have a short-term capital gain
because it is just taxed as an ordinary
income tax. Meaning, let's say you make
$100,000 this year in taxable income,
and through your investing and trading,
you have realized capital gains that are
short-term of $10,000, then the IRS will
look at you and say, "Hey, for this
year, we're just going to say you made
an income of $110,000."
Short-term capital gains are just taxed
like ordinary income. Long-term capital
gains tax rates are more favorable,
though. For lower-income individuals and
households, the long-term capital gains
rate is 0%. The middle bracket for
middle-income individuals and households
has a long-term capital gains rate of
15%, and for the highest bracket of
highest-income earners, the long-term
capital gains rate is 20%. Obviously,
there are some exceptions, but that's
how it works out in general. And when I
say inflation here, I'm referring more
to the classic definition of inflation,
which means inflating the money supply.
Hey, real quick, if you are an active
investor and your portfolio's not
growing as fast as you'd like, then I
would like to give you a free gift. This
is something I've been working on for a
long time. My team and I put together a
portfolio stress test. We looked at the
top six risks that people are exposed to
in their portfolios many times without
even knowing it. And most importantly,
what you can do to fix it. So, we built
this really cool questionnaire quiz on
my website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So, no matter what is
holding your portfolio back, and no
matter what risks you're exposed to,
maybe without even knowing, I want to
help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities, again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email, a PDF you can download and
you can keep it forever. And it's going
to give you access to all of my courses.
I've created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. If you'd like
to take advantage of this, all you have
to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information, and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. If you're not aware, dollars are
created and destroyed through debt being
created and paid off. That's how the
dollar system works. Dollars are lent
into existence. When you swipe your
credit card and dollars end up in the
bank account of the grocery store, those
dollars were not transferred from Visa's
bank account into the grocery store's
bank account. Those dollars were created
out of nothing and ended up in the
grocery store's bank account. Then, in a
month, when you pay off your balance in
full because you're not an idiot, you
know how to use a credit card, you are
taking income that existed, dollars that
already existed in the financial system
that came to you through your paycheck
from your employer, land in your bank
account, you pay off your credit card,
as soon as that happens, both that asset
and that liability on the balance sheet
ceases to exist, and those dollars
disappear from the system. They are
destroyed. You may be familiar with this
chart. This is M2. This is the money
supply. This is all the dollars that
exist in the US financial system. You
can see over time it goes up. The only
way this happens is because the amount
of debt in the system goes up. And it
goes up continuously, largely driven by
US government borrowing because the
national debt continues to go up
consistently by about $2 trillion per
year. Now, because some debt is getting
paid off and some new debt is causing
new dollars to come into existence, you
do have offsetting forces here, but on
net over time the money supply grows
because the total amount of debt in the
system also grows. As those new dollars
are created and over time the total
money supply continues to expand, those
new dollars work their way from one
person's bank account to another bank
account to another bank account to
another bank account as they purchase
goods and services and assets. And just
like a rising tide lifts all boats, as
there is more money, it dilutes the
purchasing power of the existing pool of
money. It bids up the prices of
everything along the way. And one of the
results of that is a stock market and
asset prices that continue to just go up
along the way. And this problem actually
accelerates as inflation gets worse
because as people notice their dollars
are continually devalued and continue to
lose their purchasing power faster and
faster, it incentivizes people to put
their money into things that will go up
in order to offset that loss in
purchasing power. Which means the more
inflation we have, the more incentive a
population has to buy assets even at
worse prices and worse valuations
because at least it's better than
leaving your money in cash and seeing it
get lost to inflation. And so over time
the stock market continues to just grind
higher and higher and higher as more and
more people want to protect themselves
from inflation. And it works until it's
tax time. Because if you are able to
protect yourself from the government
taking away your purchasing power
through inflation and borrowing your
money, then they still get you on the
other side when you finally have to go
and sell it someday in order to use your
purchasing power that you've protected,
and they ding you up to 20% on that if
you've done the right job and held it
for the long term. If you've held it for
the short term, you're paying the
full-blown up to 37% on that. And that's
where Trump's call to cut capital gains
taxes comes in because this would work
by indexing capital gains to inflation.
That means that taxes would only be
applied on gains after they've been
adjusted for inflation. The change would
also exempt homes of $2 million
or less from capital gains taxes, which
could also have the effect of freeing up
a little bit of supply because people
might be willing to sell their houses at
a little bit less because they wouldn't
have to worry about paying a giant tax
bill and all the gains that they've seen
from sitting in that house for the last
10, 15, 20 years. So, it could provide a
little bit of a boost to the housing
market, allow a little bit of more
affordability, and people to be able to
get into houses that otherwise were not
being sold. Now, you might be thinking
that lowering capital gains taxes would
create an incentive now to sell
something that you weren't going to sell
before, meaning that it could cause a
decline or even a crash in the stock
market. However, in 1997,
President Clinton actually signed a tax
cut bill into law where specifically the
top capital gains tax rate went from 28%
down to 20%. And yet, from 1997 all the
way through 2000, the stock market did
incredibly well, almost doubling during
that time. Now, obviously, that was at
the end of the dot-com bubble, right
before the dot-com bubble burst, so you
cannot attribute the stock market gains
just to those tax cuts. You can't
attribute the boom in the economy during
that time just to those tax cuts, but
what you can say is that modest tax cuts
on capital gains are unlikely to cause a
significant decline or even a crash in
the stock market. Now, the bad news is
that tax changes are are to require
congressional legislation, which means
that it's very unlikely this will happen
before midterms. And what mostly this is
is just a promise or a tease to try and
get people to vote for Republicans,
saying, "Hey, if you vote for us again,
we'll do this next time around, even
though we've had 2 years to do this and
we haven't done it yet." So, even though
there is a chance that something like
this does happen, I personally won't be
sitting around waiting with my fingers
crossed for this to happen. But, if it
does, I'll let you know. One last note,
if you're an active investor and your
portfolio is not growing as fast as
you'd like, my team and I put together a
completely free gift for you. It's
called the portfolio stress test. All
you have to do is answer some questions
about your portfolio and your investing
goals, and then it will email you a
custom blueprint that will help you fix
the vulnerabilities in your portfolio
that you maybe didn't even know were
there. It's also going to give you
access to all of my courses, hundreds of
hours of education, strategies, tactics
on investing and trading that you need
in order to fix your portfolio. Again,
this is all completely free stuff I used
to charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
