Americans are fed up with inflation and
now the Fed is promising that they are
going to do something about it. The only
problem with that is that their main
tools that they've ever used in the past
in order to try and bring inflation down
can't be used right now because the
economy and the US government just
simply cannot afford it. With more
spending on new endless wars, deficit
spending going through the roof never
slowing down, and now the yields on
long-term treasuries breaking out to new
highs. The Fed seems to be stuck in
between a rock and a hard place hoping
for a miracle. So, what is the plan?
First, let's look at the inflation data.
We can see that compared to the last
couple of decades, the inflation that we
are seeing right now is much much
higher. We are getting now into normal
levels for the '70s when the United
States was very close to tipping into
hyperinflation after it took the entire
world off the gold standard. The dollar
was being devalued every single year.
They were printing money like nobody's
business and inflation was just out of
control for over a decade. And the last
half a decade means many Americans are
afraid that we are just in a repeat of
the '70s again and we have no end in
sight for prices that just continue to
skyrocket higher faster than the pace at
which earnings increase. Because most
people wouldn't really have a problem
with inflation if their earnings were
outpacing it. If prices double over the
course of 5 years, but your earnings
also doubled over the course of 5 years,
you probably wouldn't be too upset. The
reason why most Americans are so fed up
with this is because prices have doubled
over the last 5 years, but their
earnings have not come anywhere close to
doubling over the last 5 years. However,
the CPI in the most recent report
actually fell for the first time since
2020. I know I'm not just talking about
how the rate of inflation dropped from
May at 4.2% to June at 3.5% cuz you can
see all throughout the last couple of
years there have been times where the
year-over-year change in prices has
slowed down. I'm talking about actual
prices and not inflation of certain
goods actually fell month over month.
So, prices that things were in May of
this year actually went down in certain
categories to June of this year. But,
that's to be expected especially because
of what's been going on with energy
recently. When you have a big spike in
energy prices from a brand new war, and
then that comes to a temporary end, then
those prices are going to fall the next
month. That is why the monthly inflation
figures don't really provide that much
reassurance to Americans because the
annual gauge is still pointing to prices
going up. And pretty much everybody is
in agreement that the weakness on this
month's inflation report is temporary
and will be gone as soon as next month's
inflation reading. Now, in case you
haven't been paying attention recently,
we have a new person in charge at the
Federal Reserve. His name is Kevin
Warsh, and he has vowed to get inflation
under control. Last Tuesday, he was
before Congress giving testimony and
answering questions about how he plans
to deliver on this promise that he has
made over and over and over again that
he is going to get price stability back
and get inflation back down to 2%. And
he said, "We have the tools to do it."
Over the coming period, they're going to
be looking at the extent and timing in
which they would need to deploy those
tools. Now, many traders were betting on
a Fed rate hike coming as soon as their
next meeting in just a couple of weeks.
But, after this monthly drop in the
inflation reading, you can see that
short-term interest rates fell as a
result of that inflation reading coming
in cooler than expected. But, this
statement from Kevin Warsh before
Congress is the closest he's come to
saying that he may indeed actually raise
rates in order to get inflation down.
Now, if you stay till the end of the
video, I'm going to show you why I don't
think that is the tool that they are
going to use. But, he's saying that no
matter what it takes, they're going to
make sure that inflation gets taken care
of. Just to reiterate how adamant he's
been about this, he said the members of
our committee have no tolerance for
persistently elevated inflation. We
share a resolute commitment to restoring
price stability. He said if we get
policy right, and we will, the inflation
surge of the last five years will be a
thing of the past. He's also mentioned
multiple times that they are looking at
the number to the left of the decimal
point with inflation, not the numbers to
the right of the decimal point. Which
means that when he sees inflation from
3.3 to 3.8, 4.2, 3.5, he's not looking
at that as victory saying, "Oh, we went
from 3.8 down to 3.5." He says we're
looking at the other number, the big
one, the three. Talking about the latest
inflation reading being slightly lower,
he said there might be some that look at
this morning's data and say, "Oh,
mission accomplished. Everything is
swell." That is not my view. Again, he's
looking to crush inflation. He wants the
Federal Reserve to get their reputation
back as being able to be in control of
the things that they are mandated to
control by Congress, namely price
stability. Hey, real quick, if you are
an active investor and your portfolio's
not growing as fast as you'd like, then
I would like to give you a free gift.
This is something I've been working on
for a long time. My team and I put
together a portfolio stress test. We
looked at the top six risks that people
are exposed to in their portfolios many
times without even knowing it. And most
importantly, what you can do to fix it.
So, we built this really cool
questionnaire quiz on my website where
you can input all the information about
your portfolio, your investing goals,
and then it's going to spit out for you
a customized blueprint that shows you
where you're currently at and what you
need to do to get to the next level. So,
no matter what is holding your portfolio
back and no matter what risks you're
exposed to, maybe without even knowing,
I want to help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities. Again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email PDF you can download and you
can keep it forever. And it's going to
give you access to all of my courses.
I've created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. If you'd like
to take advantage of this, all you have
to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
is in the description below as well.
It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information, and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. However, this lower reading for
June does take the Federal Reserve off
the hook for that expected rate hike,
which again I've stated many times I
don't think they're actually going to
hike rates. Now, one of the reasons for
this is because we can just take a look
at what the market is doing and what the
market overall expects. We're going to
take a look across the entire yield
curve starting with the 6-month yield.
We can see that prior to the
inflationary reading it started much
higher, and then after that inflation
reading came straight back down, which
means short-term rate hike expectations
are now gone. If we look at the 1-year,
the same exact thing happened. It's
still elevated beyond where it was just
a couple of weeks ago, but still we had
a drop. But, you'll notice something
interesting as we move farther along the
curve. Now, we're on the 2-year. Even
though there was a drop, we still see a
very strong trend higher. 10-year yield
as well. There was a little drop today,
but it shot right back up. 20-year yield
and 30-year yield. All of the long-term
yield long-term charts are showing a
clear expectation and move higher. Now,
this is something that the US government
simply cannot afford. This is why at the
beginning of the current administration,
beginning of 2025, Treasury Secretary
Scott Bessent said that he, referring to
President Trump, and I are focused on
the 10-year Treasury. And that is
because the 10-year is basically like
the benchmark for borrowing costs across
the curve. Even though mortgages are
30-year mortgages, most of them get paid
off, refinanced, or the more the house
gets sold, so the mortgage is paid off
that way, way sooner than 30 years. Car
loans are inching up and on average are
7 plus years now. Business loans are
around that same time, and the 10-year
yield represents a pretty close
benchmark to what the US government pays
on the national debt. So, the 10-year is
a great benchmark to determine what
borrowing costs and financing costs are
across the entire economy, both public
and private. And as you can see, the
10-year has broken out of its long-term
consolidation pattern and is heading
higher. This means higher costs for
everybody. Now, I want to present
something to you that if you haven't
heard me talk about it before, you
probably have never heard anybody talk
about. And that is that the traditional
way the Federal Reserve attacks
inflation is actually counterproductive
when you have an economy with a lot of
debt and a lot of leverage. The
traditional thinking is that if the
Federal Reserve lowers rates, then that
increases inflation. If the Federal
Reserve raises rates, then that will
decrease inflation. Let me ask you a
question about just your personal
finances. If the interest rates on the
debt that you carry, whether it's credit
card debt, auto loans, your mortgage, or
any other debt, if that interest rate
goes up, does your life get more
expensive or less expensive? Your life
gets more expensive. You have to take
cash flow that was allocated somewhere
else, whether that's savings, luxury
expenses, or basic necessities, and you
have to reallocate that to a higher cost
of servicing that debt. And maybe you
can't afford that for the long term, so
now you have to aggressively pay that
debt down in order to just continue to
affording the same things you were
before. Now, let's talk about the US
government. If the government's
borrowing costs go up, that means that
it either has to tax more in order to
pay for those higher borrowing costs, or
it just has to borrow more. If it has to
borrow more, that money has to come from
somewhere, and that means that money
that was allocated elsewhere in the
economy gets redirected to the US
government to finance those higher
borrowing costs. Now, let me ask you
about from a company's perspective, if a
company, a large business, your
employer, has some debt and their
borrowing costs go up because interest
rates go up. That means they have less
money available for raises, less money
available for investing in production,
less money available for research and
development, less money available for
anything else that they were going to
allocate that money to. Now, it just has
to go to servicing the higher cost of
debt. When there is a lot of leverage,
when there's a lot of debt, higher
borrowing costs increase inflation. The
reality is that the money supply side of
things is only one side of the coin. And
the fact of the matter is raising
borrowing costs, raising interest rates,
will only bring down inflation overall
if it stops the money supply from
increasing. But, we know it does not do
that. This is a chart of the M2 money
supply. And you can see the only thing
it ever does is go up. There was a brief
period of time from March of 2022
through July of 2023 or maybe August of
2023 where the money supply fell. Other
than that, the money supply was growing.
And that is despite the fact that
interest rates have been rising since
2020 consistently. So, even though
borrowing costs have been going up, the
money supply has continued to grow. The
only way that raising rates can decrease
inflation, bring prices down, is if it
actually brings the money supply down.
Is if it's enough of an interest rate
hike to stop the borrowing, start
everybody in the system deleveraging,
paying off the debt, brings that money
supply down. Because, if you've been
following me for a long time, you know
money is lent into existence. That's how
dollars are created. You have a mommy
borrower and a daddy lender get together
and they make a baby dollar. Money is
lent into existence. And then, anytime
that gets paid off, that money ceases to
exist. But if you have rising interest
rates and the Fed is raising rates in
order to try and stop inflation, but the
money supply keeps on growing, then all
you get is more inflation because you
stop the production of goods and
services, you increase everybody's costs
across the board, you reallocate capital
to just debt service costs, and prices
keep going up. Now, let me ask you this.
Let's say your borrowing costs go down.
Say your mortgage rate goes down from 5%
to 4%. Say your car loan goes down from
10% to 6%. Your credit card rate goes
down from 25% to 12%. Would that make
your life less expensive? Of course it
would. Now you have more cash flow
available that you were diverting to
debt service cost that you can spend on
other things that you wanted. Your life
gets cheaper. Maybe that money goes into
saving and investing, maybe goes to
paying down the debt even faster.
Whatever it is, makes your life cheaper.
Now, let's see the government's
borrowing costs go down. This is a chart
that shows just the interest cost on the
national debt and you can see so far in
fiscal year 2026, we are again above
trend, spending more money on just the
interest cost of the national debt than
ever before. But if interest rates go
down and they're able to refinance, roll
over some of that short-term debt into
longer-term debt at lower interest
rates, that would decrease their cost.
They're spending over a trillion dollars
a year just on interest on the debt.
could get that down to 750 billion? What
if they could get that down to 500
billion? Would that make the
government's expenses bigger or smaller?
All else being equal, it makes the
government's expenses smaller. It would
decrease their costs. They could use
that money for other things. Maybe that
means they tax less.
Now, [laughter]
don't get your hopes up for that, but it
could mean that. Maybe it means [snorts]
they just borrow less. That means
there's more money available in the
private sector for productive lending.
Maybe, probably, it just means they
spend more on other categories that
aren't interest on the debt. And guess
what? Even though that's not great, it's
still better than it just going to
interest on the debt, because at least
it's being deposited in somebody else's
bank account in the economy that get
then gets circulated around to real
people. Now, what if businesses, what if
your employer gets a lower interest rate
on their debt? What if rates go down,
they're able to refinance, they have
more cash flow available for hiring, for
raises, for research and development,
for making that new factory? Heck, even
if it's just retained profits across the
board, and most large corporations just
say, "Hey, we're going to take the
payday." What do you think that does to
the stock market? Earnings explode,
stock prices go up. And guess what most
Americans' wealth is based on? The stock
market, because that's where all 401ks
and pensions are invested. And by the
way, if interest rates go down, that
means the bond portions of everybody's
portfolios in their target date funds,
their balanced funds, their pensions,
those all go up, because when interest
rates go down, bond prices go up. I know
it may sound counterintuitive that
lowering interest rates, getting
interest rates across the board lower,
could actually fight inflation. But when
you have an over-leveraged economy and
everybody's expenses go down, that is
what you should expect with one caveat.
You also need to make sure that there is
a profit incentive tied to that new
debt. In other words, the reason why
2020 and 2021 resulted in such explosive
inflation was not because interest rates
went to zero. It was because the money
supply exploded from money printing that
was just handed out without a profit
incentive. When you write blank checks
to people and suddenly everybody's
purchasing power skyrockets, it can just
be spent. There's no profit incentive
tied to the increase in the money
supply, tied to the new debt. That is
the source of the initial explosion in
inflation. It was the blank checks
written to individuals, organizations,
and businesses. It was not the fact that
interest rates went down. So, the
question is, how do you make sure that
the new lending in the lower interest
rates are actually tied to a profit
incentive in order to have a larger
chance of an increase in productivity?
The answer is, again, if you've been
following me for a while, you know what
I'm going to say, it's bank
deregulation. Right now, banks are
restricted in how much money they can
lend to the private sector, and they are
forced to lend a certain amount of money
to the US government by buying
treasuries. But then, they are penalized
as well from counterproductive
regulations for lending that money to
the US government, which restricts how
much they can lend to the private
sector. I think some point the second
half of this year, we are going to see
bank deregulation push through between
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve
both working together, and the
supplementary leverage ratio that is
placed on banks is going to be removed.
That means banks will be able to lend an
unlimited amount to the US government,
and none of those treasuries they
purchase will count against their risk
limits. They can lend up to their risk
limits to the private sector. And
because there's a profit incentive
there, because banks need to make sure
that they're going to get paid back,
those loans are inherently tied to an
increase in productivity. We're not just
going to see blank checks written like
in 2020 and 2021. This pushes yields
down across the curve even at the long
end because banks can go on a buying
binge of US treasuries and push those
rates down. And then, it also pushes
interest rates down for the private
economy because now you suddenly have a
brand new source of massive lending
where everybody can refinance at lower
costs. Now, if you're thinking, how in
the world is the Federal Reserve going
to be able to get away with lowering
interest rates in the face of inflation
that we are facing right now, given the
fact everybody is so upset with it, and
given the fact that they are so
committed to getting rid of inflation?
And I think it has a lot to do with
this. This is an independent private
measurement of inflation called
Trueflation. You can look them up
online. And over the last couple of
years, they have shown inflation, their
own numbers, at readings much lower than
what the CPI shows. Right now, they're
showing that the year-over-year change
in prices is only 1.92%. One of the new
task forces that Kevin Warsh has started
at the Federal Reserve is specifically
to deal with the way they collect data
and look at inflation. And so I think
redefining inflation, gathering data in
a different way than the Bureau of Labor
Statistics does, gathering inflation
more up-to-date and more fast, and
getting it from many more places is
going to result in them being able to
justify saying inflation is actually a
lot lower than what we thought it was.
And I'm not saying that independent
sources like True Flation are the truth
they are right, but I am saying that
there is a legitimate justification for
saying that inflation is lower than what
the BLS says it is. And I think the
Federal Reserve is going to use that. So
combining new data showing inflation is
lower than what they thought, paired
with lowering interest rates, paired
with bank deregulation, we're probably
going to see real inflation numbers
actually come down and a boom started in
the economy and in the markets through
that increased lending capacity of banks
and increased borrowing and spending
capacity of productive businesses. It's
a boom you will probably want to take
advantage of, but please be careful
because if you know anything about
booms, you know they're always followed
by busts. One last note, if you're an
active investor and your portfolio is
not growing as fast as you'd like, my
team and I put together a completely
free gift for you. It's called the
Portfolio Stress Test. All you have to
do is answer some questions about your
portfolio and your investing goals and
then it will email you a custom
blueprint that will help you fix the
vulnerabilities in your portfolio that
you maybe didn't even know were there.
It's also going to give you access to
all of my courses, hundreds of hours of
education, strategies, tactics on
investing and trading that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. Again, this
is all completely free stuff I used to
charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
