In a 5 to 4 ruling, the Supreme Court
just handed both President Trump and the
Federal Reserve a lot more power. And
that is because the Supreme Court just
ruled that President Trump does in fact
have the power to fire top regulators
who are heads of his agencies inside of
the executive branch. However, there was
a carve out for the Federal Reserve
saying that he does not have the same
power over the bureaucrats at the Fed.
So, what is going on here? Well,
President Trump has been trying to fire
people that work at various agencies
inside of the executive branch. And in
move that many are saying handed him a
lot more power with a major expansion of
executive branch influence by the
president. He's able to fire the heads
of independent agencies. This was mainly
about the head of the Federal Trade
Commission where he was trying to fire
Democratic official Rebecca Kelly
Slaughter. And the ruling basically
says, yes, Trump is allowed to do that
because these agencies are underneath
the executive branch and the president
is in charge of the executive branch.
However, he also tried to fire Lisa Cook
at the Federal Reserve last year who he
was trying to fire over mortgage fraud
allegations. Now, regarding the ability
to now fire anybody that he wants
outside of the Federal Reserve, Trump
posted on his Truth Social and he said,
"Today's historic Slaughter decision by
the Supreme Court is the greatest
increase in presidential power in the
last 100 years." And he was saying this
as a good thing. Although, as you are
probably aware, many people are looking
at this as a bad thing. So, in order to
understand the court's ruling here, we
do need to go a little bit back in time
to the way that the separation of powers
were designed by our founding fathers.
There are three basic functions of
government. Number one is making the
laws. Number two is carrying out those
laws. And then number three is
interpreting those laws. If we imagine a
complete totalitarian dictatorship where
all the power resides in a single
person, this single person, whether it's
a tyrant or a king or a dictator, would
be able to make up any law that they
want. They would have the power to
enforce those laws, carry out those
laws, execute those laws. And then if
there's ever a disagreement about those
laws, then they are the ones who get to
decide whether or not they interpreted
those laws correctly. And as you can
imagine, this could result in extreme
abuse of power because if you are both
the judge and the jury and the
executioner, you can basically do
anything you want and nobody can
challenge you. And so the way the
Constitution was written separated these
powers into separate groups. And you
look at Article 1, Section 1, literally
the beginning of the US Constitution, it
says all legislative powers herein
granted shall be vested in a Congress of
the United States which shall consist of
a Senate and a House of Representatives.
It is very clear. It is explicitly clear
that the only people who are allowed to
come up with the regulations, who are
allowed to write the laws, are
specifically just Congress, which is
explicitly made up of the Senate and the
House. I don't think it could be any
clearer. The only people who are legally
allowed by the Constitution to make the
laws, the regulations, that people have
to follow is just Congress. Nobody else
has the constitutional authority to
regulate human action. Now, fast forward
to Article 2, Section 1, and it says,
"The executive power shall be vested in
a President of the United States of
America." He shall hold his office
during the term of 4 years together with
the Vice President chosen for the same
term to be elected as follows. In other
words, the person
who is the one who is allowed to execute
the law, which means carry it out,
enforce it, and do the will that is
written by the laws, is the President.
>> [laughter]
>> So, so far we have Article 1, this big
group of people are the ones who are
allowed to make the laws. They are not
allowed to enforce them. They are not
allowed to carry them out. They are not
allowed to do anything other than make
the laws. The executive branch, a branch
that executes the law, is by the
Constitution the president. That power
of execution is vested in a president.
It doesn't even say the executive
branch, it says the president. Hey, real
quick, if you are an active investor and
your portfolio's not growing as fast as
you'd like, then I would like to give
you a free gift. This is something I've
been working on for a long time. My team
and I put together a portfolio stress
test. We looked at the top six risks
that people are exposed to in their
portfolios many times without even
knowing it. And most importantly, what
you can do to fix it. So, we built this
really cool questionnaire quiz on my
website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So, no matter what is
holding your portfolio back and no
matter what risks you're exposed to
maybe without even knowing, I want to
help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities again, completely free.
Once you go through this little
one-minute questionnaire on my website,
it's going to send you a customized
blueprint to your email PDF you can
download and you can keep it forever.
Then it's going to give you access to
all of my courses. I've created
literally hundreds of hours worth of
educational content that I used to sell
for hundreds, sometimes even thousands
of dollars. This is now my free gift to
you. You can access it 100% completely
free of charge. It's going to give you
all the education, all the strategies
and tactics that you need in order to
fix your portfolio. All you need to do
is go through the questionnaire, open up
the email, save that PDF, and get to
work. If you like to take advantage of
this, all you have to do is go to my
website heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. So, what happens when there is a
disagreement about what the law says or
a disagreement about the way that the
law was carried out. Well, I'm sure you
know where we're going to go next,
Article 3. Fast forward to Article 3 of
the US Constitution, Section 1, and it
says, "The judicial power of the United
States shall be vested in one Supreme
Court and in such inferior courts as the
Congress may from time to time ordain
and establish. The judges both of the
Supreme and inferior courts shall hold
their offices during good behavior and
shall at stated times receive for their
services compensation which shall not be
diminished during their continuance in
office." In other words, there must be
at least a Supreme Court and then there
can be other courts underneath the
Supreme Court if Congress decides that
we need that. But at least a Supreme
Court and the power to interpret the
law, the judicial power, that's what
judicial power means, adjudicating
disputes regarding the law, is vested in
the courts, specifically the Supreme
Court and maybe lower courts as well.
And so, we get to what happened
recently. There was a 91-year-old
precedent that was overturned by the
Supreme Court because the president
tried to fire somebody that works inside
of the executive branch, somebody who is
executing the law, carrying out the law.
And the Supreme Court allowed Trump to
fire Kelly Slaughter, which expanded his
power to fire basically anybody, again,
underneath the executive branch. It
means these agencies underneath the
executive branch that were formerly
independent now face a tremendous amount
of turmoil in their immediate future cuz
again, now the president can wield his
will, bend the executive branch to what
he wants to do with a lot more freedom.
In other words, play by my rules, what I
want to do, or you're out of here. This
decision unravels more than 100 years of
tradition in which Congress tried to
insulate many agencies, especially those
with rule-making enforcement and
adjudicatory powers from the whims of
presidential politics. The previous
arrangement gave those organizations
relative stability and allowed them to
enforce rules consistently across
Democratic Republican administrations.
In other words, Congress had shielded
agencies from political influence even
though those agencies are underneath the
executive branch. And so, per the
Constitution, where the laws are only
able to be made by Congress, those laws
are carried out only by the president,
not the executive branch, but the
president. Executive powers are vested
in a president, and then the disputes
about that are decided by the Supreme
Court. It seems as if this is a return
more towards the way the Constitution
designed the country to operate. But,
>> [laughter]
>> and this is a big butt, because at this
point you're probably thinking, "Well,
man, I feel like this sucks, but it
looks like it's probably closer to what
the Constitution wanted, what the
framers of the Constitution in this
country wanted, because prior to this
ruling, the president was not operating
with the full vested power of execution.
And according to the Constitution, that
power should be vested solely in the
president." So, on first glance, it
would seem like, "Okay, this is a return
to a more constitutional government."
Like I said, there is a big butt. And
that big butt comes from this. All
legislative powers here in granted shall
be vested in a Congress of the United
States. Now, it is clear that Congress
has the ability to create federal
agencies. In fact, if you just look at
the list of all of the federal agencies,
the vast majority of these agencies,
even though they exist and operate
underneath the executive branch, they
were created through legislation by
Congress. And so, because of that,
Congress has said, "Hey, we created
these agencies, so we get to influence
or shield from the president how they
operate or who gets to say and do what."
And obviously, now a lot of that has
been overturned, and the Supreme Court
has ruled, "Hey, these agencies are
executive agencies, and so the power of
execution ultimately lies with the
president." So, what is the problem with
this? The problem is the semantic
difference between regulation and
legislation. In fact, if you look at the
Federal Register, which is a collection
of documents that is like a hundred
thousand pages long, it is a collection
of all the laws and regulations that the
federal government has to keep track of
and enforce, more and more of that is
written by federal agencies. In other
words, federal agencies are carrying out
the act of legislation, even though they
don't call it legislation, the act of
writing rules that people and businesses
have to follow, things that people can
or cannot do, is legislation. And that
is being done by agencies under the
executive branch, not by Congress.
Congress has been abdicating their
responsibility and their congressional
mandate that they are the only ones who
legislative power can be vested in.
Again, all legislative powers are vested
in Congress. However, US government over
the last hundred years or so has not
been following
that explicit designation and the
executive branch, the agencies that are
held underneath the executive branch,
have been making their own rules and
laws as way to interpret what the main
big laws really mean because Congress
doesn't have the expertise or wants to
spend the time writing all the little
rules and little regulations, so they've
abdicated that responsibility to the
executive branch. And now they're upset
when the Supreme Court returns some
power to the president that the
Constitution states it should be. They
are upset because now the president has
more power than he actually should
because the executive branch has been
carrying out legislative responsibility.
So, if you're tracking with me, Congress
is supposed to be the only one who can
write the laws. They have made a bunch
of federal agencies to do their job for
them. And because agencies under the
executive branch have been doing their
job for them, they've said, "Hey, we
need to have influence over how these
agencies can be operated, who can be
fired, who can be hired, how they can
operate, and the president shouldn't
have control that because they're doing
our job for us." Now, the Supreme Court
comes in and overturns that and says,
"No, president has executive authority.
Executive power is vested in the
president." So, now everybody's upset
because they're like, "Oh, shoot."
This just handed the president way more
power than he should actually have
because not only now can he bend the
entire executive branch to just his will
because that's what the the Constitution
says, but that means that he's got a
bunch more legislative authority now
because the executive branch through
agencies has been legislating and they
will continue to do so. Now, the biggest
problem with all this is that not only
has the executive branch been
increasingly doing legislation, which
they're not supposed to do, now they
have more executive power, but for the
last 100 years or so, they've also been
carrying out judicial power. There's
something called Chevron deference,
which refers to the doctrine under which
courts historically deferred to a
federal agency's interpretation of an
ambiguous statute that the agency
administers. In other words,
>> [laughter]
>> what this did was that when an agency
decided a regulation, again, Congress
hasn't written a law about it, but an
agency just says, "Hey, this is how we
are saying that this law should be
carried out. So, here's all the small
rules and nuances and regulations about
these laws and we are going to be
executing these laws." If there was ever
a challenge to that and somebody sued
the federal government said, "Hey,
you're interpreting the law wrong or
you're overstepping your bounds." The
courts would defer to the federal
agency's interpretation of the statute,
which means the courts would just say,
"Okay, well, let's bring that federal
agency in. How do you interpret this law
that you wrote?"
>> [laughter]
>> And the agency would say, "Well, we
interpret it the way that we executed
it." And the court would say, "All
right, well, you're the experts, so
we're going to defer to your expertise
here." Which means that the executive
branch has been judge, jury, and
executioner. They've been writing the
laws, executing the laws, and
interpreting the laws. Now, a couple of
years ago, Chevron deference was
overturned. In June of 2024, the Supreme
Court finally and emphatically overruled
Chevron deference, which was the Supreme
Court taking back power to the courts so
that they weren't deferring just to the
executive branch for a lot of these
things. That was a great step in the
right direction, but there is a still a
lot of momentum and a lot of precedence
set. You can see this in the comments
where Chief Justice Roberts said, "The
views of the executive branch could
inform the judgment of the judiciary,
but did not supersede it." In other
words, it doesn't mean they're going to
completely ignore the interpretation of
the executive branch who was making
those regulations in the first place. It
just means they're not going to by
default defer to them. So, step in the
right direction, but we still have way
too much power in the executive branch.
Now, at the beginning of the video, I
also mentioned the Federal Reserve and
how we just got a big amount of power
handed back to the Federal Reserve, and
that's because there was a specific
carve out with this ruling for the
Federal Reserve where the Supreme Court
blocked President Trump's attempt to
fire Lisa Cook for mortgage fraud. I
think part of this was because everybody
could see right through this and
understands that it this had nothing to
do with mortgage fraud. The current
administration went through every single
person, did digging on everybody at the
Fed that they could to find anything
they could dig up on them to try and use
that as an excuse to remove them cuz
they want the Federal Reserve to do
things that will benefit the current
administration. And if they thought
there was anybody at the Fed who would
not, then they were going to do whatever
they could to remove them. This is why
the legal battle with Jerome Powell has
been ongoing where they criminally
charged him for the building costs, the
renovation costs on the Federal Reserve
buildings. Now, does that mean that any
of these people are completely innocent?
No, it just means that this was very
targeted for political reasons, and the
Supreme Court is saying, we want to
insulate the Federal Reserve
specifically from presidential
influence. In a statement about the
ruling, Lisa Cook said that this affirms
a principle that has underpinned sound
economic stewardship for generations
that the Federal Reserve must make all
its policy decisions guided by evidence
and independent judgment free from
political interference. Now, I've stated
before that the Fed's independence is
not independence from the government. It
is political party independence. And you
can see this very clearly if you read
the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977,
which is where the Federal Reserve got
its dual mandate from Congress. Congress
tells the Federal Reserve that they can
exist, why they exist, and what they are
allowed to do or what they are supposed
to do. On the very first page, section
2A, it states the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System and the
Federal Open Market Committee shall
maintain long-run growth of the monetary
and credit aggregates commensurate with
the economy's long-run potential to
increase production so as to pro- mote
effectively the goals of maximum
employment, stable prices, and moderate
long-term interest rates. Everybody
talks about the dual mandate that the
Federal Reserve's job is to maintain
stable prices and maximum employment,
but in the exact same sentence, there's
a third mandate there, which is moderate
long-term interest rates. And in fact,
those aren't even three separate
mandates. Those are the ways that they
are supposed to carry out the mandate,
which is to maintain long-run growth of
the monetary and credit aggregates
commensurate with the economy's long-run
potential to increase production. In
other words, the money supply and
monetary and credit aggregates should
increase at the same pace as the
increase in the rate of production,
goods and services. The reason why they
want to do this, and they do this
through maximum employment, stable
prices, and moderate long-term interest
rates, is because it funnels the maximum
amount of purchasing power to the
government. If you have maximum
employment, it doesn't mean maximum
wealth for people, it means maximum
taxpayers, because employees are the
ones who pay taxes. So, maximum
employment means maximum tax revenue for
the US government. Stable prices, which
means prices that never go down, they
just keep on trickling higher, means
that people have to continue working
more and paying more in taxes, and it
means the value of the dollar slowly
goes down over time, which means all of
the debt that the government is
borrowing gets cheaper to pay back over
time. It's devaluation. And if those two
things fail, that's why they have the
third thing in here, which is moderate
long-term interest rates, so that the
Federal Reserve must make sure that
those long-term interest rates never get
to a point where the US government
cannot afford them. The entire reason
the Federal Reserve exists, and their
mandates given to them by Congress, are
to maintain maximum revenue for the
United States government. That's it. It
may not be why they started in the
beginning, but it's why they exist now.
So, when we talk about political
independence, it is independence from
whichever party is in control of White
House. It's not independence from
influenced by the government, cuz that's
the only reason why they exist. So, the
recent ruling by the Supreme Court shows
that the Federal Reserve will maintain
its independence in a way that allows it
to continue to funnel as much purchasing
power to the US government as possible,
and the executive branch just got handed
a lot more power because not only do
they continue the ability to legislate
in direct contradiction to what the US
Constitution says, but now the president
alone has a lot more power to wield that
legislation and the execution of that
legislation to the way that he thinks it
should be done. And if you're happy
about this because your man is in
control, you should be scared because at
some point your man will not be in
control. In the words of Warren Buffett,
you want a company that a could be
the CEO and it would still run well
because someday a will be in
control. In the same way for a nation,
you want a system of government to where
your enemy could be the one in charge
and everything is still great for you
because someday your enemy will be in
charge. So be careful about who you hand
too much power to because someday the
person you don't want to have that power
will be in that seat. One last note, if
you're an active investor and your
portfolio is not growing as fast as
you'd like, my team and I put together a
completely free gift for you. It's
called the portfolio stress test. All
you have to do is answer some questions
about your portfolio and your investing
goals and then it will email you a
custom blueprint that will help you fix
the vulnerabilities in your portfolio
that you maybe didn't even know were
there. It's also going to give you
access to all of my courses, hundreds of
hours of education, strategies, tactics
on investing and trading that you need
in order to fix your portfolio. Again,
this is all completely free stuff I used
to charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
