The situation with the US Treasury
market continues to get worse and the
verbal interventions by Treasury
Secretary Scott Bessent do not seem to
be working. If you take a look at
long-term yields like the yield on the
30-year Treasury, you can see the exact
moment when Scott Bessent said that they
were going to be doubling buybacks of
long-term bonds. You can see it yields
immediately fell. But over the following
two days, they rose right back up to
where they were before. This exact same
pattern happened with the 20-year and
even more so with the 10-year. And the
10-year is the most important one here
because that is the benchmark for
basically all borrowing in the United
States. Yes, mortgages are 30-year
mortgages, but the vast majority of them
get paid off or refinanced much sooner
than that, much closer to a 10-year time
period. Same thing with auto loans are
now approaching very close to 10 years.
Business loans are usually right around
10 years. So, the 10-year Treasury is
the benchmark because if you are going
to lend money to somebody for a normal
amount of time, which in this country
happens to be somewhere around 10 years,
then you are going to benchmark it
against the risk-free rate. At the end
of the day, the United States can always
use force to collect the money that it
needs to in order to pay back its
lenders. And so, for better or for
worse, US Treasuries are considered the
risk-free rate. And so, if you're going
to lend money to a person that carries
risk default because they cannot use
violence to get back the money that they
owe you, you're going to charge a
premium. You're going to collect more of
an interest rate from them than you
would from somebody who's considered
risk-free like the US government. And
so, the fact that 10-year yields have
been rising for a very long time, they
have broken out and they haven't been
this high since all the way back in 2007
means that there is a problem. And you
know it's a problem when the Treasury
Secretary comes out and says, "Hey,
we're drawing a line in the sand right
here. We're going to do what it takes to
make sure yields don't get above where
they're at. And because that latest
verbal intervention didn't work, on
Monday, August 24th, Scott Bessent said
that he could tap nearly a trillion
dollars from the Treasury General
Account to fund bond buybacks. Now, just
in case you are not clear what a buyback
is, it is the government issuing new
debt, borrowing new money over here in
order to pay back old debt over here.
So, they are paying off 30-year
Treasuries early, paying off 20-year
Treasuries early, and paying off 10-year
Treasuries early. That's what a buyback
is, and the way that they are doing that
is by borrowing the exact same amount of
debt just with a shorter time horizon,
meaning they're issuing T-bills. It's
like paying off part of your mortgage
early with a credit card. But, this
latest announcement takes it to another
level, because this isn't funding
buybacks with the immediate issuance of
short-term debt like T-bills. This is
directly using the Treasury General
Account in order to fund it. In other
words, he's saying, "Hey, look, we can
go even one step farther to say that
this is the absolute maximum that yields
should be." But, this is not an infinite
spending pool. The Treasury General
Account, you can think of like the US
government's checking account. This is
the chart of the Treasury General
Account going back all the way to 2003,
and you can see that it wasn't until the
Great Financial Crisis that this account
really got any usage at all. And that's
because prior to the Great Financial
Crisis, the US government's checking
account, their money, it was kept inside
the banking system. But, quantitative
easing was introduced from the Great
Financial Crisis bailouts, and so
because of that, the Federal Reserve and
policymakers didn't want all of that
cash being inside the banking system,
and there being too many reserves and
not enough collateral for the other side
of the banks' balance sheets. And so,
the government moved the Treasury
General Account into the Federal Reserve
itself. So now the Treasury General
Account is actually an account held at
the Federal Reserve outside of the
banking system. And you can see that's
when it started to really get used. And
just in case it's not clear what this
account is really used for since I'm
calling it the government's checking
account, whenever the government gets
money from any source, whether it's from
taxes or from borrowing, those dollars
go into the Treasury General Account
from whatever bank account they came
from in the financial system. Then, when
the US government spends money on any
source, whether it's to veterans or
military contractors or health care or
politicians' paychecks, it leaves the
Treasury General Account and goes back
out into the banking system into
whatever bank account of the person they
are paying. This is literally just their
checking account. Hey, real quick, if
you are an active investor and your
portfolio is not growing as fast as
you'd like, then I would like to give
you a free gift. This is something I've
been working on for a long time. My team
and I put together a portfolio stress
test. We looked at the top six risks
that people are exposed to in their
portfolios many times without even
knowing it. And most importantly, what
you can do to fix it. So we built this
really cool questionnaire quiz on my
website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So no matter what is holding
your portfolio back and no matter what
risks you're exposed to, maybe without
even knowing, I want to help you find
and fix your vulnerabilities. Again,
completely free. Once you go through
this little 1-minute questionnaire on my
website, it's going to send you a
customized blueprint to your email, PDF
you can download and you can keep it
forever. And then it's going to give you
access to all of my courses. I have
created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. So, if you'd
like to take advantage of this, all you
have to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information, and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. Now, you can see the usage of this
account was very, very stable until
roughly 2015-2016,
when it started to have much higher
balances and then much steeper drawdowns
and then much higher balances and then
much steeper drawdown. Obviously, it had
this massive spike in 2020 and then
another massive drop in 2021. So, let me
explain why it has such big peaks and
troughs. The number one reason is
because of political gridlock. This is
the United States government's checking
account, which means as long as there's
money in there, they can continue to
fund their expenses regardless of any
shutdown or any budget concerns. And so,
when Congress gets together and they're
fighting about what to choose for the
next budget, how much money they're
going to spend in which places, and then
the government shuts down, this account
is where the spending comes from until
it gets so low that they are at risk of
not being able to pay their bills, and
then suddenly Congress decides to get
their act together and say, "Okay, we
made a decision." And then all the tax
money rushes back in. And all the
borrowing money rushes back in. And so,
partly as a result of the more extreme
disagreements between both sides of the
aisle and how long that gridlock lasts
before a decision is finally made at the
end, Treasury secretaries over the last
10 years or so have made the decision
that they want the Treasury General
Account to be at a higher level
normally, so that if it ever gets to a
situation where they can't borrow, they
have enough money in there to continue
to pay the bills for a while until
Congress makes a decision. And because
government spending now runs about $7
trillion a year, right now they like to
have about a trillion dollars in this
account so that they can last at least a
month or two before the account runs
dry. Now, if you're wondering why there
was such a big spike in 2020, it's
because of all of the borrowing and
stimulus checks and quantitative easing
that happened during that time. The
government said, "Hey, we're going to
send out a bunch of money to businesses
and organizations and people." And so
because of that, we need to uh borrow a
bunch of money. That borrowing ended up
coming from the Federal Reserve who
printed the money, bought those
Treasuries off the open market. And so
temporarily, all of that newly printed
money ended up inside the Treasury
General Account. And then as the
spending started and continued, then it
bled out of the Treasury General Account
pretty quick during 2021. But that
brings us back to today where the
Treasury likes to keep its balance
somewhere around this trillion-dollar
mark so that they have a cushion. When
the income dries up, they can keep
paying the bills for at least a month or
two. And so when Scott Bessent came out
on Monday, August 24th, and said that
they could tap nearly a trillion dollars
in the Treasury General Account in order
to fund bond buybacks, this is not a
long-term solution. This is just another
Band-Aid. Just like buybacks don't
really do anything in the grand scheme
of things because they're just paying
off old debt by taking out new debt. It
doesn't change the number of dollars in
the system. QE. This also over long term
can't do anything either because the
only way that they can get money into
the Treasury General Account is either
through more borrowing or from taxing.
And we know they're not raising taxes.
The amount of tax revenue that comes
into this account is very consistent.
And part of that consistency is that it
is consistently low, meaning the US
government runs a deficit every year,
almost $2 trillion per year. It's
already up 10% higher than it was at the
same point last year. So, that's a $2
trillion difference between the tax
money coming into the Treasury General
Account and the money that is going out
of the Treasury General Account, which
means that has to be made up for through
borrowing. And so, the trillion dollars
in the Treasury General Account cannot
be used as a long-term solution in order
to push down yields of bonds. And that's
simply because extra borrowing must be
done from somewhere else. Okay, so there
are two main questions that normally get
brought up when people look at what the
Treasury is doing with the Treasury
market right now. The first question is,
how in the world do bond purchases of
any sort push down bond yields? The
answer to this is because bond prices
and bond yields are inversely
correlated. If I borrow money from you,
let's say I borrow $100 from you at a 5%
interest rate, that means in 1 year I'm
going to pay you back $105.
$100 that I borrowed in principal plus
$5 in interest. So, now you have a paper
IOU from me that means contractually in
1 year you're going to get $105 from me.
If for whatever reason you don't want to
keep that debt until a year from now, if
you want to sell that debt to somebody
else, you have the right to do so. If
you're able to sell that debt to
somebody else for a better price, you're
able to convince somebody else to buy
buy that debt from you for I don't know,
let's say $104.
Well, in 1 year now I'm no longer going
to pay you $105, I'm going to pay the
new person $105.
They paid $104
for that debt and they're going to
collect $105. So, just for round
numbers, let's say now that's a 1%
interest rate. A 1% yield. Not quite,
but close enough. And so, when you see
yields meaningfully go down, interest
rates dropping a lot, it's because the
underlying bonds are being purchased for
way more. The same number of dollars are
getting paid back to whoever owns the
new debt, which means because they paid
more, it's a lower yield. And the vice
versa is true as well. When interest
rates or yields are going up, it's
because those underlying bonds are being
sold off and the prices are going down.
That brings up the second question,
which is if there's just not enough
demand from the market at the longer end
of the curve, those bonds are getting
sold off and the interest rates are
spiking, why is there so much demand at
the short end of the curve? Why do
T-bills continue to see low interest
rates? And the answer is because of
charts like this. This is a chart that
shows all of the dollars currently in
money market funds. You can see that
from 2010 all the way through 2018, the
number was fairly flat and then it
spiked up until 2020, moved sideways for
a couple of years, and then since then
has been growing and is now sitting at a
record of 8.2 trillion dollars in money
market funds. Money market funds are
where cash sits inside of any type of a
brokerage account. So, this is a regular
taxable brokerage account, an IRA, a
401k. Anytime there is any cash balance
at all, behind the scenes, it is in a
money market fund. Now, you can also
choose to put your cash into a purchased
money market fund, but it's going to be
the same behind the scenes anyway.
Everything inside of money market funds,
for the most part, is in T-bills. This
is short-term government debt, debt that
matures within weeks to a couple of
months. And because it is so short-term,
it is considered extremely liquid.
There's virtually no interest rate risk
on short-term debt. And because the
interest rate is still fairly close to
4%, many institutions and individuals
alike are willing to put their cash in
it because it's very liquid, pays an
okay interest rate, and has none of the
long-term risk of having inflation eat
away that interest rate like the
longer-term bonds do. And it's important
to note here that these are constantly
getting paid off and just rolled over.
When you get those T-bills paid off
behind the scenes inside of the money
market fund, you're not pulling your
cash out into physical dollar bills and
stuffing it under your mattress. You're
leaving the cash in the account. And
behind the scenes, it's just going back
into the new new T-bills. The old
T-bills get paid off, it rolls over into
the new ones. And so there's just
constant and growing demand for
short-term government debt. And it's not
just money market funds. Checking
accounts, savings accounts, basically
any dollars inside the US financial
system at all, they're in T-bills behind
the scenes. Literally the only way you
can hold US dollars and not have them be
in T-bills behind the scenes is
literally if you have physical cash and
shove it under your mattress. And then
you're not getting the interest rate to
protect you from any inflation. So most
people do prefer to have it inside of an
account where they at least earn a
little bit of an interest rate on it. So
this is why when you see headlines like
a third of the United States national
debt is maturing this year in 2026,
that's not a big deal at all. That's
like all the T-bills that are maturing
this year, that's just cash that owns
those T-bills. And as soon as they
mature, they're automatically going to
have the demand for it to reinvest in
new T-bills because that money just
stays in there and rolls over. That's
why the US government is refinancing a
lot of its debt to the short end right
now because that's where there's demand,
and they're buying back and retiring all
of the longer-term debt cuz there's
basically no demand there. However, what
Bessen has done, and this is the last
two points I'm going to talk about in
this video that are the most important
for you to pay attention to given the
changes that are happening in the bond
market. What Bessen has done at the long
end is drawn a line in the sand. He has
said he will do whatever it takes to
make sure that 30-year yields don't go
much higher, 20-year yields don't go
much higher, and 10-year yields don't go
much higher. He will double buybacks. He
will quadruple buybacks. He will drain
the Treasury account and he will take
much more drastic actions if necessary
to make sure that long-term yields don't
rise past where they're at right now
much at all. But that's all this is
right now. This is a line in the sand
he's saying don't go past here. But what
these actions really can't do is
meaningfully push down long-term yields.
What Scott Bessent is doing with
Treasury buybacks and using the TGA,
that's not going to push the 10-year
from 4.7 down to four or lower. It's
just going to say, "Hey, we don't want
it to get above 4.7." It's just not
going much past that. So it's a line in
the sand, but it's not a really
effective push to get yields down. This
creates an incentive for anybody who
does have a large stockpile of the
long-term Treasuries that they can sell
them even here because they know they
won't be able to meaningfully push
prices down and then interest rates or
yields up because Scott Bessent has
drawn this line in the sand and said,
"Hey, we won't let it get past here." So
sellers don't really have to worry about
that. Now, I don't know if there are any
large enough sellers that can move the
Treasury market that are wanting to sell
that haven't yet, but it does create the
wrong incentive at this current level
than what he's trying to do. And that
brings up the second main point, which
is that something much larger is
probably coming and is necessary in
order to push long-term yields actually
lower. The only way to get long-term
yields like the 30-year down to 4% or 3%
something significantly lower is through
a massive bond buying program. A big
buyer has to come in and buy trillions
of dollars worth of long-term bonds to
get those yields meaningfully lower.
Now, historically that was foreign
central banks. They're no longer big
buyers. Historically that was also the
Fed, but right now the Fed is saying
they don't want to be a big buyer
either. It would be kind of a shock to
see big QE 1 2 3 4 trillion dollars of
added Treasuries to the balance sheet
happen at a point like right now. So,
the only other buyer that I can think of
that would come into play here that
would be politically palatable would be
banks. Right now, the only thing
stopping banks from coming in and buying
up all the Treasuries necessary to push
interest rates much lower is the
supplementary leverage ratio. In other
words, it's just regulation. Right now,
banks are prohibited from buying more
Treasuries than they have per currently
bought. And it is simply a line in the
sand that the regulations have drawn on
saying, "Hey, you can't buy any more
than this because of risk limits." Now,
you may agree with that or you may
disagree with that, but the reality is
if the current administration and the
Federal Reserve want long-term yields to
be meaningfully lower, a big buyer is
necessary. And right now, it seems like
the only big buyer who's not already
maxed out is US banks. And if they
simply remove that rule that says, "Hey
banks, you have to stop buying after
you've hit this many Treasuries."
Suddenly, banks will be able to buy a
lot more Treasuries. But who knows,
maybe we'll just go full 1940s with
outright yield curve control. The
Federal Reserve will just blow up their
balance sheet with 5 to 10 trillion
dollars more of US Treasuries, and we'll
see interest rates plummet and probably
inflation skyrocket as well. One last
note, if you're an active investor and
your portfolio is not growing as fast as
you'd like, my team and I put together a
completely free gift for you. It's
called the portfolio stress test. All
you have to do is answer some questions
about your portfolio and your investing
goals, and then it will email you a
custom blueprint that will help you fix
the vulnerabilities in your portfolio
that you maybe didn't even know were
there. It's also going to give you
access to all of my courses, hundreds of
hours of education, strategies, tactics
on investing and trading that you need
in order to fix your portfolio. Again,
this is all completely free stuff I used
to charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, and you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
