On August 27th, Bloomberg reported that
Venezuela is considering leaving OPEC
amid talks of the United States
government taking stakes in multiple oil
fields in Venezuela. This is an
unprecedented advancement of the Dawn
Road doctrine as the United States
government under the current
administration is advancing its push to
take more and more control over the
entire Western Hemisphere. So, the fact
that Venezuela is considering leaving
OPEC is something that would have been
considered impossible just a couple of
years ago. But, the political situation
in Venezuela is obviously much different
after the United States went in and
kidnapped Maduro. Now, as of the time of
this recording, this is somewhat of a
secret topic that conversations that US
officials have had with Venezuela and at
this point no final decision has been
made. But, it would be a fairly logical
next step after the United States
basically took control of Venezuela's
oil sales. And, it's not strictly the US
government alone by itself, it's also
United States corporations like Chevron
who's currently in talks to expand in
Venezuela during this large US push.
They're currently in negotiations to add
two new oil fields to its operations in
Venezuela. But, on the government side,
this is apparently being negotiated
directly by the Pentagon where the
Department of Defense is negotiating a
stake in as many as 17 different oil
fields across Venezuela. Now,
technically what is being discussed here
in terms of the legal structure is a
lease, not outright ownership. However,
leaks are reporting that the lease could
be as long as a 100 year lease. And,
that's not the only thing that is
unusual about this. Hey, real quick, if
you are an active investor and your
portfolio is not growing as fast as
you'd like, then I would like to give
you a free gift. This is something I've
been working on for a long time. My team
and I put together a portfolio stress
test. We looked at the top six risks
that people are exposed to in their
portfolios, many times without even
knowing it. And most importantly, what
you can do to fix it. So, we built this
really cool questionnaire quiz on my
website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So, no matter what is
holding your portfolio back, and no
matter what risks you're exposed to,
maybe without even knowing, I want to
help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities. Again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email PDF you can download and you
can keep it forever. And then it's going
to give you access to all of my courses.
I've created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. So, if you'd
like to take advantage of this, all you
have to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. The U.S. International Development
Finance Corp does have legal authority
to create and uh invest in developing
nations and foreign infrastructure
projects, and it was created by Congress
to do things like that. However, the
OSC, which is the Pentagon's Office of
Strategic Capital, which was established
by President Biden in 2022, is what's
being used here in order to take this
stake in Venezuelan oil fields. But, the
problem with that is that the OSC
doesn't actually have the explicit
ability to take direct equity stakes in
projects, which is probably why this is
being structured as a lease, even though
it's a 100-year lease, which will
functionally operate very similar to
equity, but maybe it skirts the letter
of the law. So, the question is, why
would the US want to do this in the
first place? One of the reasons is
because Venezuela has some of the
world's largest oil reserves. This would
allow US corporations, such as Chevron,
to go in and start developing, producing
more, and capturing much of the profits.
In turn, this could also help the US
further secure its energy independence
and dominance in world energy markets.
When you take a look around you, like
literally where you're sitting right
now, as you look around you, you might
see something like this, a plug that has
a USB-C connector and plugs into the
wall to charge your devices. You might
see something like this, like a mouse
that you use on your computer. You might
see something like this, you know, a cup
to drink water out of. You might see
your phone sitting there on the desk
next to you. You might be looking at the
food that you just ate for lunch. Or you
might be hearing the hum of the air
conditioner blow cool air on you as you
sit there doing your work. The reality
is, there is not a single thing that you
can look at in your entire world that
does not exist because of oil.
Everything from the materials in every
single thing we use in life, to the
energy that was produced in order to
produce those things that we use in our
lives. And the energy that was produced
and used in order to transport those
things to you to use in your everyday
life. Not a single part of that entire
chain can happen without oil. If the
price of oil can come meaningfully down
because supply increases enough to
compensate for demand, that makes all of
life cheaper. There's a great book on
this called Energy and Civilization a
history by Vaclav Smil that basically
shows there is a one-to-one correlation.
It is the same thing between growth and
consumption and production of energy.
However, that does not mean that it is a
moral thing to do for governments to use
force and military might in order to get
something that benefits their own people
at the expense of somebody else. So, I
am not saying that it would be a good
thing inherently morally for the United
States government to go in and just take
something from Venezuela. However, what
I am saying is that it would be a good
thing economically in terms of making
numbers go up that most people in
America care about or in terms of prices
making those numbers go down. So, in
other words, it's possible to be opposed
to whether something should happen or
not, but also recognize the benefits
that will come if that thing does happen
since we don't have control over what
they do anyway. And in case you think
this came out of nowhere, it didn't.
They've been telling us their plans all
along. This is the unclassified
Department of War National Defense
Strategy for 2026
and you can see pillar number one of
their plan is to defend the US homeland
which basically encompasses the entire
Western Hemisphere using
narco-terrorists
as justification for expanding power
over this half of the globe and laying
out plans to secure key terrain all the
way from the Arctic to South America
like Greenland, Gulf of America, and the
Panama Canal which means even if this
doesn't play out exactly like it is
currently being reported, things like
this will continue to push forward. One
last note, if you're an active investor
and your portfolio is not growing as
fast as you'd like, my team and I put
together a completely free gift for you.
It's called the portfolio stress test.
All you have to do is answer some
questions about your portfolio and your
investing goals and then it will email
you a custom blueprint that will help
you fix the vulnerabilities in your
portfolio that you maybe didn't even
know were there. It's also going to give
you access to all of my courses,
hundreds of hours of education,
strategies, tactics on investing and
trading that you need in order to fix
your portfolio. Again, this is all
completely free stuff I used to charge a
lot of money for. Your gift free. To
access it just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest
the link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
