A rapidly growing number of young
American adults are now living at home
with their parents and relying on their
parents for financial assistance. The
big question is, why? Is this just a
change in cultural preferences, or is
this a major sign of major problems with
the economy and wealth overall? Recent
report from CNBC showed that 42%
of adults are now relying on their
parents for financial support. And
specifically, if we want to take a look
at the number of people who are living
with their parents, I think it is
important to break it down a little bit
more than just young adults. And so
that's exactly what I did here. You can
see this is ages 18 through 24 broken
down by men and women going back all the
way to 1960.
You can see that really since about the
mid-80s, the number of men who are
living with their parents, that are
again age 18 to 24, has very, very
slightly drifted lower. Looks like it
bottomed around mid-2000s, maybe 2005 or
six, and then has rebounded since then,
but is still slightly lower than it was
in the 80s. You can see here the number
of women age 18 to 24 was steady from
about the 1980s through the mid-2000s,
and has pretty dramatically risen since
then, and is almost equal to the number
of men living at home with their
parents. But that's ages 18 through 24,
and that is not the area that has shown
the biggest change. If we look at ages
25 through 34, we see a much bigger
jump. Going back again all the way to
1960 broken down by men versus women, we
can see that back in 1960,
the percentage of men living with their
parents who are ages 25 to 34 was just
over 10%, and for women it was about 7%.
But over the last one to two decades,
we've seen a dramatic rise in this age
group from both men and women, and now
we see about 20% of men ages 25 to 34
living with their parents and almost 14%
of women. Going back to the younger
cohort, this number does make a little
bit more sense because the younger you
are, the harder it is to get a good job
that pays good money, especially when
rent prices and insurance prices and all
that are increasing. So, for that
younger crowd, it does make more sense
to have a higher percentage of them
living with their parents. But, the
older crowd, 25 to 34, this is the one
that is the most concerning, especially
because we see this one is the one that
has the most dramatic rise. So, let's
take a look at a couple more pieces of
data to try and pick apart whether this
is just a change in cultural
preferences. Again, parents saying,
"Hey, we've got the money, we've got the
space. Why don't you come live with us
cuz we really like you being around."
And younger people saying, "You know
what? I really do like being around my
parents 24/7. So, let's do that." Or
whether this is a sign of just economic
hardship. One way that we can look at
this is by comparing incomes to gold
because we know that in the past gold
was used as money and gold does a much
better job of preserving its purchasing
power over time. Now, it's not going to
be a perfect comparison, so this is not
the only comparison we are going to look
at, but it is helpful to get a little
bit of a more solid purchasing power
anchor over time to compare incomes.
Let's start off with the year 2025. We
can see the median household income in
the United States in dollars is just
over 80,000 US dollars, and because
we're starting in 2025, it's the same
for dollars versus gold. As you go back
in time, look at the dollar number,
obviously, the median household income
in US dollars is going to go down over
time. We go back just over 100 years to
the median household income back in the
1920s was $2,160.
The gold adjusted equivalent of that was
$352,000.
Now, obviously, there are some problems
with this because when you look at the
gold-adjusted median income in 1970,
that number is a staggering $753,000.
And just 10 years later, it drops to 90%
lower at 71,000. And so, this data is
skewed because of what the price of gold
relative to US dollars has done over
time from government pegging the price
of gold to dollars. So, this data is not
completely accurate, but it does give
you a close approximation that measured
in gold, or at least if we were still
using gold as money today, the
purchasing power of the median income
should be a little bit higher at least
than what it is today. But like I said,
that's not the only comparison we need
to make. Let's take a look at median
incomes versus things that people
actually buy. Some of the categories
that people spend the most money on,
like housing. And I guess since we're
talking about people living with their
parents, looking at the price of housing
makes a little bit of sense. So, first,
let's take a look at this chart. This is
the CPI index for rent of primary
residence that is adjusted for median
income going back to the 1980s. So,
these are both the raw numbers, and
neither of these are adjusted for
inflation because we just want to look
at how much income at that time was
needed to buy how much rent at that
time. And you can see that back in the
1980s, it took a lot less of the median
purchase the median rent. And again,
starting around the late 2000s, wonder
if it had something to do with the
financial crisis and the regulation and
the money printing, that started to
soar. And now, it takes a much larger
chunk of the median income to afford the
median rent. So, it's very clear, over
the past couple of decades, rent has
gotten more expensive even when you
adjust for incomes going up. But we can
also look at home price-to-income ratio,
and this chart is specifically the
median home sale price adjusted for the
median household income. And you can see
this data goes all the way back to the
1950s.
You can see that through the 50s into
about 1975,
home prices got cheaper and cheaper and
cheaper compared to incomes. In other
words, even if home prices, raw home
prices were going up, it was more
affordable because incomes were rising
faster. However, that's when they
bottomed and with volatility, home
prices compared to incomes have been
going up since then and they are more
expensive than they have ever been on an
income adjusted basis. Meaning yes,
incomes have gone up over that time,
house prices have gone up more. Now,
you'll see some people try and make very
unintelligent comparisons saying that
no, houses aren't actually more
expensive. They were way more expensive
in the 1950s if you look at how many
hours of work it took to buy a square
foot of house. And obviously, that's
true. But guess what? It doesn't matter
how big the houses are. It matters what
the entry price is, what the threshold
is for getting into a house. It's no
secret that houses have gotten a lot
bigger. But that doesn't help the person
who's trying to buy a smaller house.
That doesn't help the person who's just
trying to get their foot in the door,
literally and figuratively. The fact
that houses have gotten bigger and
therefore it doesn't matter that they've
gotten more expensive is ludicrous.
Anybody who's struggling to afford a
home would prefer to be able to buy a
home rather than just feel warm and
cuddly because well, at least the people
who can afford the homes have bigger
homes.
That doesn't matter here. Just because
there's more square footage available
doesn't make it easier or doesn't make
it cheaper. There's still the cost of
entry to get into a home is to buy the
home. So, stats like this are just
irrelevant. Hey, real quick, if you are
an active investor and your portfolio's
not growing as fast as you'd like, then
I would like to give you a free gift.
This is something I've been working on
for a long time. My team and I put
together a portfolio stress test. We
looked at the top six risks that people
are exposed to in their portfolios many
times without even knowing it. And most
importantly, what you can do to fix it.
So, we built this really cool
questionnaire quiz on my website where
you can input all the information about
your portfolio, your investing goals,
and then it's going to spit out for you
a customized blueprint that shows you
where you're currently at and what you
need to do to get to the next level. So,
no matter what is holding your portfolio
back and no matter what risks you're
exposed to, maybe without even knowing,
I want to help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities. Again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email PDF you can download and you
can keep it forever. And that's going to
give you access to all of my courses.
I've created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. So, if you
like to take advantage of this, all you
have to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. Now, I asked the question at the
beginning of the video whether this was
a cultural issue, whether everybody was
just changing their preferences, or
whether this was a wealth and economic
issue. And I think the data is pretty
clear. I'll show you here that this is a
wealth issue. This is an income issue.
This is an economic issue. This is not a
cultural one. I understand that some
places around the world, you have much
higher percentages of adults choosing to
live with their parents. And a lot of
people like to say, "That's a cultural
thing. Those people want to live with
family members." And maybe so, but as
you're going to see here, there's a very
high correlation between wealth in
countries and the countries with the
high percentage of people living with
their parents. Meaning, maybe those
cultural preferences are driven by the
fact that they can't afford to do
anything otherwise. So, first let's take
a look at this map of Europe. And we're
taking a look at Europe first because
we've got a pretty high number of
countries here with fairly large
dispersion of wealth and percentages of
people living at home. And you can see
the dispersion here. Up here, we've got
the countries with the lowest percentage
of adults age 25 through 29 living with
their parents. Down here, we've got kind
of the middle ground. And then
throughout the bottom here, we've got
the highest percentages of people living
with parents. Now, I've switched over to
a chart that shows median wealth per
adult. And you can see it is not a
perfect correlation, but it's pretty
close. We've got the highest amount of
wealth in these countries, the next
highest amount of wealth per person in
these countries, and then we've got the
lowest amount of wealth over here.
Again, putting these charts side by
side, we can see that again, even though
it's not perfect, there's a pretty high
correlation. The wealthier countries are
per capita, the more likely it is that
young adults don't choose to live with
their parents. Probably because they
don't have to. And if you don't like
median wealth per adult, you can also
look at GDP per capita. And you can see
it's pretty much the exact same
dispersion. You've got the wealthiest
GDP per capita countries up here. Down
here, you've got the next. And then
you've got the poorest spread over here.
Again, pretty much the exact same
dispersion. So, that's just Europe, but
how does this look across the globe?
Because European countries tend to have
pretty similar cultures, at least when
you compare it to the cultural
differences around the rest of the
world. This is the chart that shows
median wealth per adult by country
around the world. You can see the
richest countries, you're going to see
it in Europe, you're going to see
Canada, the United States, and
Australia, and then over here in Japan.
You have the highest concentration of
poverty in Africa, over here in Asia,
and then a little bit in South America,
as well. Now, this is the chart that I
put together that shows the percentage
of young adults living with their
parents. Now, just a quick note about
this chart. This chart did not exist. I
put this together. I had to pull data
like census data from many different
sources, compile it, and then create
this interactive map with that data,
which means that some of the places are
measuring things differently. For
example, when you see the highest number
of young adults living with parents
coming out of Singapore, it's because
the way that they measure that is ages
15 through 30. So, they're obviously
going to have a really high number of
young adults living at home if you're
measuring people who everybody else are
measuring as kids. And then you're also
going to have a lot of countries that
have missing data, like a lot of these
countries in Africa, we just don't have
the data for anywhere. So, I say all
that just so you can take this chart
with a grain of salt, but as you can
see, the places that have the lowest
number of adults living at home
are going to be the darkest blue
countries. So, you've got like the
United States, you've got the countries
in Europe. We've got really high
percentages of people living at home in
places like Russia, some of the
countries in Africa, some of the
countries in South America, some of the
countries in Asia. Now, again, like I
said, it's not perfect, but putting
these charts side by side, you see a
very close correlation between the
countries that are the richest per
person countries and the countries with
the lowest number of young adults living
with their parents. So, this trend that
we are seeing over the last couple of
decades of more and more young adults in
the United States living with their
parents does not seem to be one of
cultural preferences changing. It seems
to be one of necessities changing
because young adults just cannot afford
to go out and live on their own anymore.
Now, I think it's very clear that there
is a big chunk of this that is just a
discipline issue. Yes, things have
gotten a lot more expensive, but people
still have the ability to make choices.
Personal responsibility and agency is
not gone just because things have gotten
more pricey. For example, if you look at
the average savings by age, people under
the age of 35 have an average
transaction account balance, like their
main checking account balance, of
$20,000, but only a median account
balance of 5,400, which means this
20,000, since it's average, it is
heavily skewed by the people who have
the most amount of money. The median is
a lot more close to reality for the vast
majority of Americans. And $5,400 in
your checking account is maybe for most
people enough to last 1 month. Meaning
most Americans, most young adults, are
spending everything they earn. Anything
that comes in goes out. There's not a
surplus that's being accumulated there.
Now, at this point, you might be
thinking, well, that's still just
because everything is too expensive. And
I'm going to show you a couple things
here that looks like, hey, well, if we
made different choices, we'd have
different outcomes. For example, today
78.8% of Americans use delivery services
for food. The average American spends
$35 per order and orders food from
delivery services almost four times a
month. They spend over $1,500 on food
annually. You can see the breakdown by
state, and you can see places like
Arizona, and New York, and California,
and Texas. Some of these states that are
green have the highest rates of spending
on food delivery services. And I picked
this out specifically because when you
order food from a food delivery service,
not only are you paying somebody else to
buy your groceries for you, but you're
paying somebody else to turn those
groceries, those ingredients, into
edible food, into recipes, into meals
for you. And not only are you doing
that, but you are also paying somebody
to go deliver it to you, to go drive
over there, pick it up, and drop it off
at your door. If you eliminate the
expenses of having somebody go drive and
personally deliver your food to you, and
paying the expenses of having somebody
actually make your meals for you, all
you're left with is the cost of the
actual ingredients. And if you are
strapped for cash, if you are not able
to afford things, if you are getting
feeling like you're getting left behind,
you have no business living like a rich
person, paying other people to do those
things for you. It makes much more sense
to buy the ingredients yourself, meal
prep for yourself, and save that money.
Now, I know it sounds like I play both
sides here, I'm going to do it again
because it's not like across the board.
Young people get a really bad reputation
from old people for just spending money
willy-nilly on luxuries and things that
old people say, "You know what? I didn't
buy any of that stuff when I was young.
I saved all my money and I just put it
to work and I bought a house and I built
it myself and I just, you know, pulled
myself up by my bootstraps." And part of
that perception is because a lot of
things that used to be very expensive
luxuries 50 years ago, today are super
inexpensive commodities. For example,
you've got old people saying, "Don't go
out there and buy yourself expensive
electronics like TVs." But price
inflation for TVs has been negative
pretty much every year for the last 75
years straight, meaning in consistent
price dollars, the price of TVs has
dropped dramatically for almost 100
years. This means that between 1950 and
2026, TVs that cost $1,000 in the year
1950 would cost literally $5.98
in 2026 for an equivalent purchase. And
the same is true of many things like
clothes and furniture. So, a lot of
things that young people are spending a
lot of money on in terms of their
income, it's actually pretty cheap. And
older people just don't get that because
when they were young, those things were
actually very expensive compared to
their income. But, the things that are
the largest and most expensive
categories, like rent compared to income
and home sale prices compared to income,
have gotten dramatically more expensive.
And so, the rise of young adults who are
living at home with their parents does
not seem to be influenced mainly by
cultural preferences changing or
strictly due to bad budgeting or bad
spending practices. It seems largely
driven by the fact that young adults are
having a much harder time affording
their own place to live. And at this
point, if you are in that situation,
you're probably feeling a little bit of
desperation, a little bit of a lack of
hope. Especially after seeing the data,
you may even feel vindicated. I knew it.
The system is broken. They're all out to
get me. It's not my fault. And guess
what? At least partly, you're right.
But, now what? What if it's not your
fault at all? What are you going to do
about it? Do you have an excuse? Of
course you have an excuse. By many
measures, financially things are much
harder today than they were 30 years
ago, 40 years ago, 50 years ago. But,
the reality is that even though it may
not be your fault, it's still your
responsibility if you want to get ahead.
Nobody else is coming to save you. No
president is going to fix this. If
you're going to get ahead, the only
person who's going to be able to do it
is you. And the harsh truth is that many
people who have done far better than you
and I started off with hands that were
much worse than the hands that you and I
have. You can only play with the hand
you were dealt. You don't get to do
over, and you can't force the universe
to give you a different situation.
Whatever strengths you have, it's up to
you to use them. And whatever weaknesses
you have, it's up to you to find a way
around them, fix them. If something is
standing in your way, go around it or
knock it down. Do whatever it takes. The
truth is, even though things are getting
harder, the United States is still the
best place in the world with the most
opportunities to create wealth. Just
this last year, over half of all new
millionaires created in the world came
out of just the United States. Out of 8
billion people on Earth, 300 million
live in the United States. And yet, half
of all of the millionaires produced
around the world came out of one country
with 300 million people, just the US.
Yes, it's harder than it used to be.
Yes, the opportunity is still here. Even
if it takes you time to get where you
want to go. Even if it takes you a year.
Even if it takes you 5 years. Even if it
takes you multiple decades. Guess what?
The time will pass anyway. Might as well
be closer to your goal in 5 or 10 years
than the same place as you are right now
because you threw up your hand and said,
"Well, it'll take too long. Might as
well yolo, live a little right now, and
give up because I'm never going to get
where I would want to be." Because many
young people today are just saying,
"Well, you know what? It's not worth the
cost. It's not worth sacrificing my
young years." And that might be true.
But, make no mistake, there's always a
cost. There's always a sacrifice. You're
not avoiding sacrifice, you're choosing
a different one. Because you are either
giving up what you want most for what
you want right now. You're either giving
up financial freedom in the future for
being able to live a little right now.
Or, you can give up what you want right
now in order to gain what you want most.
There's always a sacrifice. The good
thing is, you get to choose what it is.
And when you get to the end of your
life, would you rather look back with
regret, with vindication, with
bitterness and resentment, with your
list of reasons why you weren't able to
make it, why somebody else was able to
hold you back. Would you rather be able
to complain, rightfully so, with
justification that all of your excuses
were valid, or would you rather say,
"Screw them. I did it anyway. Screw the
system. Screw the elites. Screw the
kleptocrats. Screw the politicians.
Screw the parasites who only tried to
regulate and control my life and siphon
my purchasing power away from me in
order to keep me down and live off of
the backs of my labor." Screw them
because despite all them and despite the
roadblocks they placed in my way, I did
it anyway. Despite the fact that I had a
bunch of excuses that were valid.
Despite how hard everybody else made it
for me, I still did it. I still won. And
at least, even if you fail and you spend
your entire life sacrificing what you
want right now for what you ultimately
want and you still don't achieve it, at
least you didn't submit. At least you
didn't surrender. You never gave up. It
is far better to die on your feet
fighting than it is to live on your
knees. So, get after it. Do whatever it
takes. One last note, if you're an
active investor and your portfolio is
not growing as fast as you'd like, my
team and I put together a completely
free gift for you. It's called the
portfolio stress test. All you have to
do is answer some questions about your
portfolio and your investing goals and
then it will email you a custom
blueprint that will help you fix the
vulnerabilities in your portfolio that
you maybe didn't even know were there.
It's also going to give you access to
all of my courses, hundreds of hours of
education, strategies, tactics on
investing and trading that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. Again, this
is all completely free stuff I used to
charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
