The new chairman of the Federal Reserve
is Kevin Warsh, and last week was his
first FOMC press conference as the new
Federal Reserve chairman. And today, in
this video, I'm going to explain to you
everything that you should be expecting
from the Federal Reserve moving forward,
what it should do to the economy and to
the markets, because there are some big
changes coming down the road. Now, the
first thing that I want to point out,
which doesn't really matter, but he
actually looks excited to be there. He
was pretty much smiling the entire press
conference, and it's a little bit of a
breath of fresh air after Powell being
in there for so many years. It seemed
like he was just done with it,
especially after being at the helm
through 2020, 2021, 2022, and taking the
brunt of basically all of the terrible
decisions that the Federal Reserve has
made over those years. It is a nice
breath of fresh air to get somebody in
there who looks excited to be there and
has some real plans on doing things
differently. Now,
I don't know whether it will actually
work or not, or whether it will turn out
better or worse for most Americans, but
at the very least, there's some big
changes here. I think the number one
thing that needs to be pointed out is
how much he reiterated and focused on
the Federal Reserve's renewed vow to
restore price stability. It was at least
a dozen times Warsh mentioned that they
will be getting inflation back down to
2%. He said, "That's our focus. That's
our commitment. That is one of the two
jobs that Congress has given us." He
said the Federal Reserve is "unambiguous
and unanimous. We are going to get
inflation back down to 2%."
>> I am pleased to report that members of
the FOMC are unambiguous and unanimous.
This committee will deliver price
stability.
>> Now, the way they do that may not be the
way that everybody wants them to, but at
least that's what they're saying is
their number one top priority. Now,
here's the problem. Traditionally, the
way that the Federal Reserve has managed
things really since the financial crisis
is increase their balance sheet very
quickly and then slowly decrease their
balance sheet. You can see this just by
looking at the chart. So, after the
financial crisis, they started
monetizing a bunch of assets and it
would increase a bunch and then maybe
slowly decrease and then increase a
bunch and then flatline and slowly
decrease and then increase a bunch and
then increase a bunch again and then
slowly decrease and then recently it's
just been slowly increasing just a tad
bit. The problem with this is that it is
a blunt force instrument like taking a
sledgehammer as your main tool and it
does have an impact on prices broadly.
But, the reason why the Federal Reserve
has never really been able to just drop
its balance sheet super quickly is
because that results in a bunch of
destruction economically. It sucks so
much liquidity so quickly out of the
system that you wind up with debt
defaults, you wind up with potentially a
deflationary death spiral. And so, by
trying to attack inflation too directly
with just the balance sheet on its own,
you could wind up fixing inflation and
you could wind up tipping everything
over into a devastating deflationary
death spiral where prices of everything
collapse and you get widespread
unemployment. This was something he
directly addressed saying that we are
not going to attack inflation at the
expense of employment because that's the
other job that that the Congress has
given to the Federal Reserve. So, he
said, "We think there's a world in which
GDP can grow, employment can stay really
strong and keep on growing and we can
bring prices down." He said, "That's
what we are going to do." Pretty
unambiguous about it. He was saying
like, "Hey, we are going to find a way
to make this happen." Again, I don't
know how successful they will be, but
that was what he was saying. Which in my
opinion leaves only one thing only one
way that they can actually accomplish
this, which is number one increasing
production and number two redefining how
inflation is measured. So, let's talk
about both of those. We're going to talk
about redefining inflation first. He's
launched five different task forces for
each of the five areas that are central
to the conduct of monetary policy. And
these task forces are for each of these
areas as follows. Number one, Fed
communications. Number two, balance
sheet policy. Number three, data use and
sourcing. Number four, productivity and
jobs. And number five, inflation
frameworks. I am going to get to every
single one of these task forces because
they are important. But right now,
because we're talking about inflation,
we need to focus on just two of these,
which is data use and sourcing and
inflation frameworks. So, number three
task force, the data use and sourcing,
means that they are going to go after
better sources of data for where they
collect, especially inflation data from.
Quite frankly, the way that the Federal
Reserve collects data to make decisions
is very outdated. He knows this, and
he's saying, "Hey, we're going to revamp
this." So, he's assigned a task force to
go in and say, "Hey, we need a better
way to collect way more data, and most
importantly, make the data way quicker."
He mentioned this during the Q&A section
of the press release that they are not
going to just rely on the old stale data
like they used to, because by the time
they get the real data after all of the
revisions, it's too late to do anything
about it.
>> What we're really interested in is
what's happening right now. What we're
less interested in is echoes of history.
>> So, he wants to get data that is way
more robust, meaning way more data
points compared to the way they collect
it now. And number two, way more real
time. There are already free market
sources that do this, and these free
market sources routinely report
inflation numbers that are way different
than what the official government
sources report. One of these sources is
called Trueflation, which right now is
reporting the year-over-year change in
pricing at 1.81%.
Compare that to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics official CPI report, which
shows inflation at 4.2%. And so,
changing and broadening and getting more
real-time data on what prices are
actually doing is very likely to result
in the Federal Reserve saying, "Hey,
inflation is not what you thought it
was. Inflation is much, much lower." And
that is why task force number five to
deal with the inflation frameworks
matters because while they start getting
new and potentially better data, they're
going to be reframing how they actually
interpret what inflation really is,
which inflation metrics to look at,
which ones to not look at, specifically
with regards to what things they
control, what things they do, and what
impact they can have on overall
inflation. So, over the course of the
next 6 months and potentially couple of
years, I have no doubt that the Federal
Reserve will be able to say they've been
successful in bringing inflation down.
But, a big chunk of that is going to
probably be redefining how they measure
inflation. Now, the other way that they
can decrease inflation without
completely crushing the economy and the
markets is through bank deregulation.
And I know I've been talking about this
non-stop, but as they say, these boots
were made for kicking a dead horse. And
if they are able to successfully
deregulate the banks, specifically the
supplementary leverage ratio, it will
allow the banks to make a lot more loans
to the private sector in addition to the
federal government. This will bring
interest rates down across the board,
will allow a lot of refinancing from a
lot of corporate debt and a lot of
household debt, which will increase
consumption, increase investment in the
economy because it's tied to a profit
incentive rather than just printing
through Central Bank, increase real
spending in the economy, increase GDP,
increase hiring, increasing income and
wages, and all the good stuff. It'll be
a boom built on credit expansion, which
is usually or almost always followed by
a bust, but in the meantime there will
be a real increase in overall
production. So, those two things paired
together, I think are how the Federal
Reserve is going to move forward with
improving or getting that inflation rate
back down to what they are mandated to
get it down to. Now, the next task force
I want to talk about is the task force
assigned to their balance sheet policy.
This is a task force that will be
focused on looking at the size and the
composition of the Federal Reserve's
balance sheet. In other words, right now
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet is
about $6.7 trillion
and about almost $2 trillion of that is
mortgage-backed securities. I think it
stands to reason that the Federal
Reserve is going to continue to drain
these mortgage-backed securities off
their balance sheet. Kevin Warsh does
not seem like he likes the Federal
Reserve being so front and center in
managing the economy, wants to pull back
from that. In fact, he mentioned this
quite a few times during the Q&A portion
of the press conference. He said he does
not believe that it is the right way to
conduct monetary policy where they're
looking at data making changes and the
rest of the market, especially financial
markets, are just watching the Federal
Reserve to see what the Federal Reserve
is going to do. He said that distorts
the feedback mechanism for the data
because if the entire market is just
trying to respond to whatever the
Federal Reserve is going to be doing, it
changes their actions which dilutes or
even muddies the water on what those
signals should be that the Federal
Reserve is trying to pay attention to to
make up their mind about their policy
decisions. So, he wants the Federal
Reserve to take a much more backseat
approach to managing the economy. And a
big part of this is going to be draining
their balance sheet. Now again, like I
said, they can't do that without causing
an economic catastrophe unless somebody
else is picking up the slack, unless
somebody is buying what they're selling.
The only way to do that is to get the
banks to buy it, which they can
accomplish through bank deregulation.
This goes hand-in-hand with their other
task force about Fed communications
because he signaled that he doesn't want
to continue doing a press release every
single time. The FOMC statement was way
shorter this time. In fact, if you look
at this image produced by CNBC, you can
see in black are the only words that are
the same on this FOMC statement compared
to the last FOMC statement. Any line
that has the red line through it means
it was there on the last statement and
is no longer there on the current
statement. And then any red text that
doesn't have the strike through is the
text that was on the new statement. The
net result of this is that the most
recent FOMC statement is extremely
short. He does not want the Federal
Reserve to be in the business of trying
to signal to the economy everything the
Federal Reserve is thinking about what
it may do in the future, which means
they're probably only going to have
press conferences when they have
something to say. Again, this is all in
the effort to make the Federal Reserve
take a much larger backseat role to the
economy. He doesn't want to be trying to
manage the economy through words, manage
the economy through trying to get the
economy to respond to what it thinks the
Federal Reserve is going to do in the
future. All of that means that the
markets are going to be responding to
what the markets should be responding
to, which is actual economic activity.
And those actions then give a more pure
signal to the Federal Reserve for them
to make monetary policy decisions on the
things that they are required to do by
Congress, which is inflation and
employment. And the final task force
that we haven't discussed yet is their
task force on productivity and jobs,
where they'll be studying productivity,
employment dynamics, and the
transformative impact of technologies
like AI. So, how did the markets respond
to this? Well, Bitcoin sold off a little
bit, but that's nothing new. Gold sold
off a little bit as well as silver. And
the overall stock market indexes like
the S&P 500 fell pretty significantly
for 1 day, about 1.2% for the S&P 500
and about 1% for the Nasdaq. But the
biggest move that I think is the larger
signal is that short-term rates spiked.
So, you can see the yield on six-month
T-bills shot up from about 3.8% all the
way up to 3.9%.
The one-year had a sizable move to the
upside as well, but as you can see as we
get longer and longer out on the curve,
the move to the upside in yields
was less pronounced. And even when you
get to the 30-year, it actually went
down. Now, on the long end, this makes a
lot of sense because if you have a new
Federal Reserve regime that's saying,
"We are going to make sure inflation
comes down," then longer-term rates are
going to come down in response to that
assuming they believe it. But,
short-term rates spiking means that the
market is responding to this as if they
believe that the Federal Reserve is
going to handle inflation by raising the
federal funds rate. And I think this
expectation is misplaced. In fact,
during a question about inflation and
the Federal Reserve's current
projections for rate hikes later this
year, Warsh actually played down those
projections from his colleagues. Nine
Fed officials see at least one rate hike
this year, but Warsh said, "I didn't
hear a ton of conviction about these
forecasts from other officials." He said
there was a high degree of uncertainty
about their outlook for the economy. And
if they do try and handle inflation by
raising the federal funds rate, then
that means it's a little bit of business
as usual. A little bit of trying to
sacrifice jobs in order to get a better
inflation reading. And I think given
everything that we are talking about
today, including reading between the
lines about where they are going to get
new inflation data from, and having the
free market pick up more of the slack or
I should say a more free market approach
to picking up the slack for the balance
sheet, so the Federal Reserve is not
taking a front seat approach to trying
to manage the economy through increasing
and decreasing its balance sheet, but
banks can do that that have more of a
profit incentive on who they lend to and
are more freed up to do so, means that I
don't think we will see interest rates
go up. And I think between some real
productivity gains and some changing of
definitions and getting data in
different ways, I think the Federal
Reserve is going to be able to run a
victory lap and say, "Hey, we were
successful, brought down inflation, and
the economy actually grew." But, we
shall see. As always, thank you so much
for watching. Have a great day.
