The death of the dollar just died. Or in
other words, the death of the dollar has
been greatly over exaggerated. If you
take a look at this chart, it's the
dollar index, the DXY, which is the
dollar measured against a basket of
other currencies. And you can see ever
since April of 2025,
when all the tariff stuff began, the
dollar was kind of falling off a cliff,
and it fell below a significant support
level of right around 100 that it had
held above all the way going back to
April of 20 22. And it has spent pretty
much the entire time since then below
this 100 level. However, from a
technical analysis point of view, you
may recognize this rounded bottom it put
in, and it continued to test that old
support level as new resistance until
recently it finally broke back above. In
this video, I'm going to explain why I
think it is headed all the way back to
110. In other words, the dollar,
compared to the basket of other
currencies in DXY, is about to get much,
much stronger. Which means that if you
have positioned your portfolio in order
to take advantage of the death of the
dollar, of hyperinflation, of a
replacement of the dollar, of
dedollarization around the globe, you
may be positioned for some heavy losses,
and may need to consider some protective
strategies to hedge against that. So,
what in the world caused this
turnaround, and why do I think the
dollar is going to continue to be headed
much higher for the near future? In
order to understand what's going on, we
have to go all the way back to the
creation of the Bretton Woods system in
1944.
On the heels of World War II, the entire
world was out of money. They had spent
all their gold, and the entire world was
basically destroyed from all of the war.
The world needed to rebuild, and they
had no money to do it. However, all of
that money had just spent the last few
years going to the United States. The
United States was flush with gold. We
had become a manufacturing powerhouse
specifically with weapons. And so, the
entire world met together at Bretton
Woods to come up with the new global
monetary system. And the one that they
came up with was one where the rest of
the world would keep their fiat
currencies, but instead of having them
redeemable or backed by gold, they would
have them redeemable or backed by the US
dollar. Because at the time, the US
dollar was as good as gold because the
US dollar was still redeemable around
the world for gold. And the US could do
that cuz we had all the gold. This put
the US dollar in the position of being
the global reserve currency, and it gave
us an unfair advantage over the rest of
the world. And for the next couple of
decades, we printed way more dollars
than we actually had the gold to back it
up, which is why the system failed in
1971. The rest of the world caught wind,
tried to redeem their dollars for gold,
we didn't have enough, so we ended gold
convertibility permanently.
>> The strength of a nation's currency is
based on the strength of that nation's
economy.
And the American economy is by far the
strongest in the world. Accordingly, I
have directed the Secretary of the
Treasury to take the action necessary to
defend the dollar against the
speculator. I have directed Secretary
Connally to suspend temporarily the
convertibility of the dollar into gold
or other reserve assets except in
amounts and conditions determined to be
in the interest of monetary stability
and in the best interests of the United
States.
>> Now, you heard that clip from Nixon
correctly. They decided to suspend gold
convertibility temporarily. But, as
Ronald Reagan like to say, there's
nothing as permanent as a temporary
government program. And so, the Bretton
Woods system ended. However, the dollar
was still being used around the world as
the main form of currency. In order to
make sure that the rest of the world
continued to use the dollar, Henry
Kissinger went to Saudi Arabia and a
pact was signed between the US and Saudi
Arabia where Saudi Arabia would sell its
oil for US dollars. And when they got
those US dollars from the sale of oil,
they would turn around and buy US
Treasuries. And in return, we would
offer lots of military presents and
protection in the region. However, over
the last couple of decades, that
agreement about the way that the world
works and the US being the military
presence around the world for policing
the world has gotten extremely
expensive. And so the United States, as
detailed in the unclassified Department
of War 2026 National Defense Strategy,
is pulling out the Bretton Woods
playbook. The World War II playbook.
Because policymakers are aware that if
things continue to go the way they went,
the United States and the dollar would
no longer maintain its place at the top
of the pile around the world. And they
did not want to lose that position. I
highly recommend you read this because
it's only about 23 pages long, but you
can see there are a few pillars of their
effort. Number one, defend the US
homeland. This is the Western Hemisphere
plan. So, it's why we went into
Venezuela. It's why there's talk about
Cuba, why there's talk about Greenland,
why we secure the Panama Canal. It's
about taking control again of the
Western Hemisphere. Pillars number three
and four are related to increase burden
sharing of defense spending around the
world with the US allies and partners.
Part of this is plunging the Eastern
Hemisphere into war and chaos. This is
one of the reasons why you've seen
everything going on with Iran. And as
they have to spend more money on their
own defense and on rebuilding, where are
they going to spend that money?
In the United States, which is why
pillar number four is to supercharge US
defense industrial base. And this is not
just regular manufacturing or the
regular industrial base. This is
specifically the defense industrial
base. Meaning the United States is the
arms dealer for the world. So, hopefully
you're putting the puzzle pieces
together right now. Why this is the
World War II, why this is the Bretton
Woods playbook all over again. The rest
of the world goes into war, goes into
chaos, spends a bunch of money, needs to
be rebuilt. All of the money, all the
spending comes back to the United
States. If if want to buy stuff from the
United States, what do you need? You
need dollars, US dollars. This is one of
the reasons why the US dollar is getting
much more valuable relative to other
currencies recently, and why it will
continue to head higher. This
administration has orchestrated a dollar
shortage around the globe. In fact, last
month, the World Bank document showed
that 27 countries were seeking to ensure
access to emergency crisis funds, and
countries like the United Arab Emirates
are discussing setting up currency swap
lines with the United States because
they need to get dollars. This is very
similar to the US financial support to
Argentina, where US Treasury Secretary
Scott Bessent
created a swap line through the Treasury
to Argentina. As the Rothschilds like to
say,
"Give me control of a nation's currency,
and I care not who writes the laws." If
you can control the money, you can
control basically everything because
everything is downstream of the money.
And so, if the United States wants to
stay as the global superpower, which it
seemingly does, the way to do that is to
make sure everybody still has to use
dollars. This is why the global reserve
currency, being the dollar after World
War II, launched the United States into
that position of being the global
superpower. And this is why in 1971,
when that system ended, it was so
imperative to get a new agreement out
there that maintained the dollar as the
global reserve currency, which is why
Kissinger went over there and made the
petrodollar agreement. And it's why
right now, as that agreement was
starting to fall by the wayside, and
that was not working like it used to
anymore, they're pulling out the World
War II playbook again. Chaos, war,
caused the world to have to spend a
bunch of money on rebuilding, rearming,
and the place that they're going to buy
that stuff from is the United States,
which means they must get dollars. This
is a giant orchestrated dollar shortage.
In my opinion, it is very likely that
the dollar continues to head much higher
as the rest of the world is scrambling
for dollars that they need. And all of
that purchasing is coming right back to
the United States. And this view is now
starting to hit Wall Street, especially
with new Kevin Warsh at the helm at the
Federal Reserve. Banks like Chase and
Bank of America and Goldman Sachs are
saying that the Fed has now activated
the dollar bullish outlook. Now, they're
claiming this has a lot to do with
American exceptionalism as well that
will support US assets, but that
American exceptionalism is orchestrated
by everything that you've been seeing
happen and play out over the last year
and a half, which is why the US economy
has remained so resilient compared to
the rest of the world. Well, fleeing
America, hedging the downfall of the
empire of the United States, global
de-dollarization, and the debasement
trade, I think, are over. And if you are
playing that game, you are playing by
the rules of the game that changed once
the administration changed. This is not
investment advice, and I understand that
it may be difficult to consider that
this might be true considering
everything, the direction that
everything has been going for the past 5
to 10 years. But good investors don't
invest for what they think should be
happening, they invest for what they see
actually happening, regardless of
whether they want that to happen or not.
Well-researched, strong opinions loosely
held so that you can change your opinion
when the facts change, when the data
changes. And as of recently, it looks
like the new reality is different than
many people expected it would be. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
