Well, the bond market is collapsing and
it looks like Treasury Secretary Bessant
has completely lost control of Treasury
yields. We're seeing yields across the
curve surge over the last couple of
weeks from the 30-year, the 20-year, the
10-year, the 2-year, and the 1-year. And
we know that yields move the opposite
way the bond prices do. So, when yields
are skyrocketing, that means that bonds
are getting dumped, they're getting sold
off, and the prices of the bonds are
collapsing. And this comes despite the
fact that Scott Bessant has been
intervening in the Treasury market by
increasing buybacks to try and stop
yields from rising. Just a couple of
weeks ago, Scott Bessant announced that
he was going to be increasing the size
of Treasury buybacks at the long end in
order to stop yields from rising. But,
as you can see, that did basically
nothing, and yields have just continued
to go up. And it wasn't just the
increase in buybacks from a couple of
weeks ago, he actually increased again
once the buybacks came around. What
started as 2 billion and then increased
to 4 billion ended up being 6 billion
dollars of buybacks. However, that's
facing a 32 trillion-dollar debt market.
If you go to fiscaldata.treasury.gov,
you can see the Treasury securities
buyback schedule, and you can see what
has been recently announced. And you can
see that as of September 10th, the
buyback that was announced was 6 billion
dollars. On this report, you can see the
maturity dates that are being purchased
back. And interestingly, which we'll
talk about in a moment, you can see the
interest rate that was getting paid on
those bonds that they are buying back to
retire. Looking at dates of what is
being bought back, you can see they're
all about 15 to 20 years until maturity.
Now, it's also interesting that you can
see on September 9th, just the day
before, there was a 12 and a half
billion-dollar buyback that was
announced. And you can see the maturity
date on these is all relatively soon.
This is debt that matures in 1 to 2
years. Now, what you'll notice is the
interest rate that the US government has
to pay on this debt that's getting
bought back and retired. Interest rates
are all pretty low, and that's
especially true of the long-term debt
that is getting bought back. You can see
the coupon rate 1%, 1%, 2%, 1%, 2%, 2%,
2%. And yes, some of it is higher, like
this one is 5%, but a lot of it, 2.8,
3%, 2 and 1/2%, 2 and 1/2%, 2 and 1/2%.
So, this is not due to the fact that the
United States government is saving money
by buying back this debt. It's the exact
opposite. This is like using a credit
card with a variable interest rate that
changes every month, but you're
currently paying 3 to 5% on, and paying
down some of your mortgage debt that's
not due for another 30 years, that has a
very low interest rate, like 2 or 3%.
You're intentionally increasing your
debt costs by doing this. And so, the
purpose of these buybacks is not to
lower the interest cost on the debt that
the government is paying right now. The
purpose of this is to try and stop bonds
from getting sold off, because the 10,
20, 30-year, they're all getting sold
off right now. But, the amount of
buybacks that the Treasury can do by
itself is just not sufficient for the
overwhelming size of the bond market.
And that's why, despite the fact that
the buybacks have been increased so
drastically lately, those bonds are
still getting sold off way more than
what the Treasury is buying back,
causing yields to skyrocket. Part of the
reason for this is because oil has been
surging. You can see that the price of
oil is back up to the point where it was
at, kind of at the height of the fears
of the war with Iran back from March to
May of this year. And that has directly
contributed to the recent inflation
numbers that came in much hotter than
expected. If you are a lender, which is
a bond buyer is a lender to the US
government, then you are going to demand
a higher interest rate if inflation goes
higher. Let's say, to keep numbers
simple, you know inflation over next 30
years is going to be 5%. Well, you're
not going to lend somebody money at 5%
because you know that your actual return
when you get your money back is going to
be zero. And so, just in case inflation
is a little bit higher than that, you're
going to demand a higher interest rate
to make sure that the devaluation of
your purchasing power is covered, plus
you actually get paid a real interest
rate on top of that. And so, as
inflation concerns and oil prices go up,
bond investors are demanding a higher
interest rate. Hey, real quick, if you
are an active investor and your
portfolio's not growing as fast as you'd
like, then I would like to give you a
free gift. This is something I've been
working on for a long time. My team and
I put together a portfolio stress test.
We looked at the top six risks that
people are exposed to in their
portfolios, many times without even
knowing it. And most importantly, what
you can do to fix it. So, we built this
really cool questionnaire quiz on my
website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So, no matter what is
holding your portfolio back and no
matter what risks you're exposed to,
maybe without even knowing, I want to
help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities. Again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email PDF you can download and you
can keep it forever. And then it's going
to give you access to all of my courses.
I've created literally hundreds of hours
worth of educational content that I used
to sell for hundreds, sometimes even
thousands of dollars. This is now my
free gift to you. You can access it 100%
completely free of charge. It's going to
give you all the education, all the
strategies and tactics that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. So, if you'd
like to take advantage of this, all you
have to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. And it's been a very long time
since the United States government has
had to issue new debt at prices that
were this expensive. If you look at
30-year Treasuries, you have to go all
the way back to May of 2004 until you
see 30-year Treasuries trading at this
level. And even then they only briefly
touched it. You have to go all the way
back to 2001, 2002 to see a time period
in which they were trading around here
regularly. And it's the same thing with
the 10-year as well. We are approaching
5% yields on the 10-year Treasury. We
have to go all the way back to 2006 and
2007 before we find a time in which the
10-year was trading at these levels.
Now, it's a little bit funny that this
is happening right now, especially the
last couple of days, because Scott
Bessent has recently been going around
saying things that indicate he's in
control of the bond market. In fact,
when he was talking about his
intervention with the yen, he literally
said, "I am the house now." He said,
"You can try to bet against me, but I am
the house. I'm acting with asymmetric
insider information, so good luck trying
to play against me." And the bond market
is right now calling his bluff. The bond
market is selling off despite the fact
that he's saying, "Hey, I'm not going to
let yields go higher." But looks like as
of right now, the Treasury just doesn't
have the firepower needed in order to
stop this from happening. And the reason
for this is because the Treasury by
itself cannot issue new currency. They
can't print money. The only way they can
buy debt off of the market is by issuing
new debt. Now, it is true that the
Treasury has something called the
Treasury General Account. You can think
of this just like their checking
account. And right now they've got close
to a trillion dollars in their checking
account. But you can see this account
regularly dips down pretty dramatically
close to zero every single time there's
a government shutdown. And so the
Treasury likes to have about a trillion
dollars in this checking account of
theirs because when the government shuts
down and they have to keep on paying for
the things that they have to pay for,
but they cannot at that time borrow new
money, they want to have a checking
account full of a rainy day fund so that
they can last the time that takes
Congress to get their act together. So,
Bessant has implied he's willing to
drain the Treasury General Account in
order to buy back as many bonds as are
necessary to suppress yields. But again,
that's still just a short-term game.
That cannot last forever. And even if
he's willing to spend $800 billion out
of the Treasury General Account, that's
still a drop in the bucket against a $32
trillion Treasury market. The bond
market simply has much more firepower
than what the Treasury can absorb. So,
this is where a lot of people think the
Federal Reserve is going to come in
because historically the Federal Reserve
has stepped in to do quantitative easing
during times like this. But Kevin Warsh,
who is now in control of the Fed, has
explicitly stated many times that he
doesn't want to just do QE and he
doesn't want the Fed to be stepping in
and just buying bonds in a normal
market. He says that's reserved for some
sort of economic crisis. And so, the
small amount of QE that the Fed is doing
right now is reserved to T-bills and
shorter-term debt, which is really kind
of the exact opposite of what the United
States Treasury really needs some big
buyer to come in and buy. There is
demand at the short end of the curve.
There's really no demand at the long
end. That's why the Treasury is stepping
in and buying that debt off of the long
end. And so, Scott Bessant is engaging
in what he's calling the Treasury twist
right now, which is essentially shifting
a lot of that longer maturity debt over
to the short end. He's trying to buy
back at the long end, but he's borrowing
at the short end in order to do that.
He's shrinking the average maturity of
the national debt. And this is called
Treasury twist because the Federal
Reserve has done something called an
operation twist in the past where they
realign the composition of their balance
sheet to more accurately represent the
outstanding Treasury debt. For example,
if they had all T-bills on their balance
sheet, but the United States government
has borrowed a lot at the long end,
maybe they they sell some of their
T-bills and buy up some of the long end.
Unfortunately, the Federal Reserve
cannot do something like that right now.
Right now on the Fed's balance sheet,
they have about 4 and 1/2 trillion
dollars worth of US Treasuries held on
their balance sheet. If you take a look
at this chart, you can see the breakdown
in maturities, where you can see the
most that they own is debt that matures
in over 10 years. And then the next
category down is debt that matures in 1
to 5 years. Next category down from
there is debt that matures between 1 and
5 years, and then below that is between
5 to 10 years. And this chart shows the
average maturity distribution of United
States government outstanding debt. This
goes back to 2000, but you can see right
now the vast majority of the maturity
distribution of the government debt
matures in under 5 years. It's about
70%. So, if you want to compare these
apples to apples, you can take a look at
these pie charts, and you can see that
the Federal Reserve on their balance
sheet holds about 4 and 1/2 trillion
dollars worth of Treasuries versus about
32 trillion dollars in outstanding
Treasury debt on the market. Of the
Fed's Treasury holdings, about 2% of it
will mature within 15 days. That's
compared to 4.7%
of all marketable Treasury debt. You can
see the Fed holds about 8.8%
that matures within 16 to 90 days versus
all marketable Treasury debt, that
number is 14%. You can see the 3 months
to 1 year category, the Fed holds about
11% of that on their balance sheet
versus the US government has about 14.8%
outstanding. You can see the 1 to 5 year
category makes it about 31% of the Fed's
balance sheet versus that same category
makes it about 35%
of all marketable debt. You can see the
5 to 10 year Treasury category is about
10.4% on the Fed's balance sheet versus
about 13.3% of all marketable Treasury
debt. And you can see that the over 10
year category is about 35% of the Fed's
holdings versus about 18% of all
marketable Treasury debt. When you
compare these two side by side, you see
the Federal Reserve owns a smaller
relative chunk of all of these shorter
maturities, and they own a much larger
chunk of the longer-dated Treasuries.
Anything under 10 years maturing in 10
years or less, the Fed owns a much
smaller chunk of that relative to what
is outstanding on the market. Anything
over 10 years, the Fed actually owns a
much larger percentage of that compared
to outstanding debt, which means the
Federal Reserve cannot maintain a
neutral balance sheet and help the
Treasury out with this problem. If the
Fed owns Treasuries with each maturity
basket roughly matching what is
outstanding on the open Treasury market,
they would have to sell off a bunch of
their long-term Treasuries and buy up
more at the short end. Again, that's the
opposite of what the Treasury needs
right now, because everyone is dumping
the long end. So, right now, the biggest
buyer of long-dated Treasuries is the
Treasury itself. Now, at this point, I
start to see questions come up like,
"What is the plan here? It seems like
the actions that are being taken are so
ineffective at accomplishing the stated
goal that people start to think there
must be some different goal. There must
be some secret plan. They must be
playing 3D 45D chess." And
unfortunately, I don't think any of that
is true. Long-term Treasury yields are
just a direct reflection of the market's
anticipation of growth versus inflation.
That's it. And so, the two biggest
actions by the government over the last
couple of years that have the largest
impact on growth and inflation are
tariffs and the war. If government
spending would just significantly go
down, then growth expectations would go
up and inflation expectations would go
down. Yields could collapse. The
Treasury would get exactly what it
wants, but it's fighting against
executive and congressional action that
is directly at odds with what it wants.
And the only way for both short-term and
long-term interest rates to come
meaningfully down is either to have it
be done by the free market in which you
need growth expectations up and
inflation expectations down, or you need
a new buyer to come in and just buy up
all of that debt anyway, which
historically has been the Fed, but with
the new leadership at the Fed, that
seems unlikely unless directly commanded
to do so by the Treasury or by Congress.
Now, I've talked before for a long time
about bank deregulation, getting rid of
the supplementary leverage ratio, and
that takes time for something like that
to be done permanently. And so, with
yield skyrocketing at the long end right
now, we just don't have the time to wait
for something like that to happen. So,
what we could see is a temporary
emergency suspension, another thing that
happened in 2020 to 2021, where it's
temporarily suspended for a year, 2
years, or even if they say indefinitely,
just don't attach a deadline to it yet.
But, really, this is just a big, hairy,
complicated, and hard to solve problem.
We're unlikely to get meaningful bank
deregulation in a short amount of time.
We're unlikely to see the market just
turn around and just start buying up
Treasuries. We're unlikely to see
inflation turn around anytime soon.
We're unlikely to see the Federal
Reserve just change their mind and start
to increase QE across the curve again.
And so, it does look like yields are
going to continue to go up at least for
the foreseeable future because buybacks,
the Treasury alone, cannot influence
this enough. They don't have the
firepower. Now, there are a couple other
small drops in the bucket that we could
see happen in order to try and solve
this problem. Number one, it's possible
that people start floating the idea of
ending the Federal Reserve's ability to
pay interest on reserve balances held at
the Fed. Right now, banks hold trillions
of dollars of their reserves at the
Federal Reserve, and they get paid an
interest rate on that. If the Fed is
banned or no longer allowed to pay
interest on overnight reserves held at
the Fed, then all that money would leave
and be invested in T-bills instead. And
so, we'd see significant demand for
T-bills, which would shove the low end
really, really far down and potentially
allow the US government to temporarily
just suspend all borrowing at the long
end, roll everything over into the short
end because there's enough demand to do
so, and then kick that can down the road
and wait to solve that problem of that
debt maturing every single year 2 years.
We'll solve that problem a year or two
down the road. We would also see direct
intervention and a changing of who
controls what the Federal Reserve does
with their balance sheet because they've
stated more and more about how their
monetary policy and the thing that they
are independent in is most focused at
controlling short-term interest rates.
And so, if Congress or the Treasury
directs the Fed outright to say, "Hey,
you need to expand your balance sheet."
know, that might be something that we
could see. But, either way, what's going
on right now with yields across the
curve from the short end all the way to
the long end is really not pretty.
Nobody likes this. And the higher they
go, the more it hinders growth. At the
same time though, the higher they go,
the more likely it is we see some
emergency action because they're
desperate and they need to force yields
to go lower. One last note, if you're an
active investor and your portfolio is
not growing as fast as you'd like, my
team and I put together a completely
free gift for you. It's called the
portfolio stress test. All you have to
do is answer some questions about your
portfolio and your investing goals, and
then it will email you a custom
blueprint that will help you fix the
vulnerabilities in your portfolio that
you maybe didn't even know were there.
It's also going to give you access to
all of my courses, hundreds of hours of
education, strategies, tactics on
investing and trading that you need in
order to fix your portfolio. Again, this
is all completely free stuff I used to
charge a lot of money for. Your gift
free. To To it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill out the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
