Midterm elections are right around the
corner, which is leading many people to
experience some concern and maybe even
some fear about what the stock market
usually does in midterm election cycle,
especially considering as of the time of
this recording, you can see the stock
market is trading in a tighter and
tighter range in this wedge here, and a
breakout to either side could lead to a
violent move in that direction. And I've
even seen some claims circulating online
that every single time we have a midterm
election cycle, the stock market always
crashes. So, let's actually look at the
data. We're going to go back 30 years,
look at every single midterm election
cycle to see what the stock market
normally does, what the worst-case
scenario has been, what the best-case
scenario has been, and look for it at
what we might be able to expect for the
next 4 months leading up to this midterm
election. And most importantly, once we
take a look at everything that has
happened prior to elections, I'm going
to show you what has happened every time
right after the elections are finished.
So, first, let's just take a brief look
at the charts. We can see the last
midterm election happened in November of
2022, and that happened basically right
at the bottom of the bear market in
2022, and so the 4 months leading up saw
a big pop and then a drop and then a
recovery after. 4 years before that was
the 2018 elections. We saw a pop and
then a drop. 4 years before that was
2014. We saw the stock market just
basically volatile, but pretty much
flat, even though it did drop, it came
back up. 4 years before that was 2010,
and we saw just a slight gradual
increase in the stock market. 4 years
before that was 2006, and we saw a
pretty steady bull market. 4 years
before that was 2002, near the bottom of
the dot-com bubble crash, and it was
volatile, but overall pretty flat during
those 4 months. 4 years before that was
1998, and we saw some volatility, a big
drop, but a recovery to where it closed
slightly down, but overall basically
flat. So, visually that's what the stock
market looked like, but I want to take a
look at the actual numbers. In addition
to that, we're going to be looking at
the total return numbers, that way we
take into account any dividends that
might have taken place along the way.
And one quick note before we actually
look at the numbers because this is
important. We're going to see the
extremes. So, we're going to see the
worst-case scenario, we're going to see
the best-case scenario, but it's
important to remember that each of those
extremes, when they happened, were
breaking previous records. In other
words, just because we're going to look
at the worst-case scenario and the
best-case scenario over the last 30
years, does not mean that that is the
cap, the maximum that could happen from
this point forward. Every time we've
ever had a record made in the past, an
extreme, a maximum, it has broken the
prior record, which means we could
absolutely see the previous records get
broken this time. All right, so we have
4 months before the midterm elections,
and in the last 30 years, the average
4-month total return of the S&P 500
leading up to the November elections in
the midterm cycles was positive 2.69%.
For the Nasdaq, it was positive 2.26%
and for the Russell 2000, that small
caps, we got a negative 1.1% on average.
Now, those are the averages, and what
you're going to notice as we dive into
the details, the averages are basically
never hit. And this is true of the stock
market returns overall over the long
term as well. The stock market averages,
depending on how you factor in
inflation, in between 8 to 12% per year,
but the market never actually really
hits that on a consistent basis. Many
times the market returns in a given year
are way higher than that, many times
they're way lower than that. And so,
just because something is the average,
it does not represent the typical
returns in a typical year. It's just
that if you repeat that same thing over
and over again, then eventually you'll
line up with that average, even though
that really never happens on any given
year. Hey, real quick, if you are an
active investor and your portfolio's not
growing as fast as you'd like, then I
would like to give you a free gift. This
is something I've been working on for a
long time. My team and I put together a
portfolio stress test. We looked at the
top six risks that people are exposed to
in their portfolios, many times without
even knowing it. And most importantly,
what you can do to fix it. So, we built
this really cool questionnaire quiz on
my website where you can input all the
information about your portfolio, your
investing goals, and then it's going to
spit out for you a customized blueprint
that shows you where you're currently at
and what you need to do to get to the
next level. So, no matter what is
holding your portfolio back and no
matter what risks you're exposed to,
maybe without even knowing, I want to
help you find and fix your
vulnerabilities. Again, completely free.
Once you go through this little 1-minute
questionnaire on my website, it's going
to send you a customized blueprint to
your email PDF you can download and you
can keep it forever. And then it's going
to give you access to all of my courses.
I have created literally hundreds of
hours worth of educational content that
I used to sell for hundreds, sometimes
even thousands of dollars. This is now
my free gift to you. You can access it
100% completely free of charge. It's
going to give you all the education, all
the strategies and tactics that you need
in order to fix your portfolio. All you
need to do is go through the
questionnaire, open up the email, save
that PDF, and get to work. So, if you'd
like to take advantage of this, all you
have to do is go to my website
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below as
well. It's heresy.financial/stresstest.
Plug in your portfolio information and
I'll send you your custom blueprint 100%
free. All right, so take a look at this
heat map here. This goes back again all
the way to 1998. We have '98, '02, '06,
2010, 2014, 2018, and 2022.
These all start in July and they end at
the election close in November. The
worst time periods that we're going to
see here are 1998 and 2002. So, the S&P
500 in '98 dropped 2.62%.
NASDAQ was down 5 and 1/2% and the
Russell 2000 was down a whopping 15%.
And the 2002 election cycle was also
pretty bad with the S&P dropping 6.9%,
NASDAQ dropping 3% and the Russell 2000
dropping 12%. Now, 2006 and 2010 both
saw fantastic returns in the 4 months
leading up to the election. We saw 9.9%
return from the S&P 500. We saw 11.79%
from the NASDAQ and 8% from the Russell
2000. 2010 was the best on record so
far. We got a whopping 17 and 1/2%
return from the S&P 500 in just those 4
months. Incredible. And then with the
NASDAQ, we saw a whopping 21 and 1/2%.
And with the Russell 2000, a whopping 19
and 1/2% in just 4 months. Absolutely
insane. And then we have more mild
numbers after that. So, 2014, we only
saw up 2% for the S&P, up 3 and 1/2% for
NASDAQ, and down 3% for the Russell
2000. 2018, we saw up a 1/2% almost for
the S&P 500, down almost 4% for the
NASDAQ, and down almost 8% for the
Russell 2000. And then in 2022, which
was just 4 years ago, this was the last
one. And it happened at the bottom of
the bear market. We saw down 1 and 1/3%
for the S&P 500, down a whopping 8 and
1/2% for the NASDAQ, and actually up
2.67%
for the Russell 2000. So, I hope it's
clear at this point, depending on which
stock market index you're looking at and
which year you're looking at, there is
absolutely no validity to the statement
that the stock market always crashes
leading up to a midterm election cycle.
It's just not true. Sometimes the stock
market is absolutely wildly positive.
Sometimes it is pretty bad to the
downside, but quite a few times there's
barely any change. Up 2%, down 2%, down
3%, up 1/2%, down 1/3%, down 3%, up 2
and 1/2%, and so you can't expect that
the stock market is going to crash from
here just because we have midterm
elections coming up. Here's a couple
other ways to visualize the data. This
is the returns by midterm year. So, on
the x-axis we have the year and then on
the y-axis we have the 4-month total
return. Framed as a bar chart so you can
see that in the late '90s, early 2000s
it was largely negative and then in the
early 2000s it was pretty positive and
then since then it's been small but
fairly volatile up and down. Here's a
chart that shows the distribution and
outliers where the inner lines mark the
median for each of the indexes. Now
looking at the average best and worst
per index, first we're looking at the
S&P 500 total return. We can see that
the best for the S&P 500 was up 17 and
1/2%. We can see the average of all
seven was up 2.69% and the worst was
down almost 7%. Switching over to
Nasdaq, we see that the best was 21% up,
the average was up 2%, and the worst was
down 8 and 1/2%. And then for small caps
through the 2000, we can see that the
best was 19 and 1/2%, the average was
-1%,
and the worst was -15%. So, now let's
take a look at a projection on what this
would look like for the stock market
from right now until November. Just keep
in mind, past performance is obviously
no guarantee of future returns and any
past extreme does not necessarily
represent the current maximum that could
happen. We can always break new records.
As of the time of this recording, the
S&P 500 is trading at about 7,400.
So, in a worst-case scenario being
repeated from the last 30 years, we
would see by the election the S&P 500 at
6,890,
roughly. It's worth noting that that is
just about at a little bit under the
past resistance of where the S&P 500 was
topped out during the end of 2025 and
beginning of 2026, which could
absolutely act as some new support. If
we were to see numbers that reflected
the average of the last 30 years, then
we would see the S&P 500 somewhere
around 7,600
by November. And it's also worth noting
that that is pretty much the exact
all-time high on the S&P 500 to date,
which means that that level could act as
some resistance for now. And if we were
to see a repeat of the best-case
scenario over the last 30 years, then
that would see the S&P 500 ending at
8,700
by November in the next 4 months. So,
what is my best guess given the data? My
best guess is that none of these three
will actually happen because averages
are rarely hit and extremes are rarely
broken. However, I think the consensus
that I am seeing from people that the
stock market is going to be moving much
lower between now and midterms is
probably wrong. Bull markets do not die
from old age, and they do not die from
overvaluation, and they definitely do
not die from fear. Fear is fuel for a
bull market. Bull markets die from
euphoria. When every seller, every short
seller, every bear has thrown in the
towel saying, "I guess markets only go
up, so I might as well buy." Because
once everybody has bought, the only
thing left for anybody to do is to sell.
So, that's when tops are put in, and we
have not seen that yet. But that doesn't
mean we can't have some volatility or
some short-term selling. And so, if I
had a crystal ball, which I don't, then
I would say that we're probably likely
to see the S&P 500 come down, retest the
200-day, which would be right around the
prior all-time high, that resistance as
new support. That will flush out all of
the sellers. That'll be fuel for the
next leg up. And we would probably see
the stock market, the S&P 500
specifically, be somewhere around 8,000
by the time midterms come up. But
because I'm voicing that projection as
my guess of what will happen, it's
probably the least likely scenario to
actually take place. So, please, do not
make any trades or put any money on that
guess. Because that's exactly what it
is, just a guess. Okay, now, so maybe
the most important piece of all of this,
what typically happens after the
November midterm elections? Well, these
numbers might look staggeringly high to
you, but over the last 30 years, the
average 6-month total return after a
midterm election is over 10% for the S&P
500, up 15% for the Nasdaq, and up 8%
for the Russell 2000. And yes, those are
the averages, those are not the extreme
highs. And in fact, between the three
main indices here, the absolute worst
6-month post-election performance comes
from the Russell 2000 at only -2.2%.
The worst performance for the Nasdaq
over the last 30 years was up 7.5% and
for the S&P up 2%. We can look at the
heat map here of every single
post-election 6-month time period for
the last 30 years, and we can see the
S&P 500 was up 22%, 2%, 10%, 15%, 6%,
7%, 9%, the Nasdaq was up 42%, 7%, 8%,
13%, 9%, 10%, and almost 16%. And the
Russell 2000 was up 12%, 6%, 9%, 20%,
6%, 4%, and then most recently down 2%.
And so, if we take the worst-case,
average, and best-case scenarios and
apply those following the worst,
average, and best-case scenarios of the
previous 4 months before an election, we
get a distribution that looks like this.
In other words, for the S&P 500, if
right before the November election we
get the worst-case scenario, and then
following the November election we also
get another repeat of the past
historical worst-case scenario, then in
10 months from now the S&P 500 will be
trading just around 7,000, which is down
approximately 5% from where we're at
right now. In every other situation, the
S&P 500 is higher than where we're
sitting at right now. If we have a
pre-election market worst-case scenario,
post-election market average scenario,
we would end up roughly 2 and 1/2%
higher. An average pre-election followed
by a worst-case post-election, we'd end
up 4 and 1/2% higher. An average
pre-election followed by an average
post-election, we'd end up 12% higher. A
worst-case pre-election followed by a
best-case post-election, we'd end up 14%
higher. A best-case pre-election
followed by a worst-case post-election,
we'd end up 19% higher. An average
pre-election followed by best-case
post-election, we'd end up 25% higher. A
best-case pre-election followed by an
average post-election, we'd end up 29%
higher. And a best-case pre-election
followed by a best-case post-election,
we'd end up a whopping 44% higher. Now,
it's worth repeating at this point, past
performance is never guarantee of future
performance, and every past extreme was
a record when it was put in, which means
we can always make a new extreme with a
new record. But, over the past 30 years,
there's only one situation that would
land the market lower, a few situations
that would land the market reasonably
just a tad bit higher, and quite a few
typical scenarios that would land the
market quite a bit higher. And so, even
if the data about pre-election markets
scares you, assuming you're not trying
to retire in the next 2 to 6 months,
then any dip in the markets should be
looked at as a buying opportunity if you
have any long-term time horizon
whatsoever. Do I think it is reasonable
to expect that the S&P 500 will be
trading above 10,000 within the next
year? Of course not. It's not within my
expectations at all. But, if it happens,
it will be well within the range of what
is historically normal. You'll not be
breaking any new records. One last note,
if you're an active investor and your
portfolio is not growing as fast as you
like, my team and I put together a
completely free gift for you. It's
called the portfolio stress test. All
you have to do is answer some questions
about your portfolio and your investing
goals, and then it will email you a
custom blueprint that will help you fix
the vulnerabilities in your portfolio
that you maybe didn't even know were
there. It's also going to give you
access to all of my courses, hundreds of
hours of education, strategies, tactics
on investing and trading that you need
in order to fix your portfolio. Again,
this is all completely free stuff I used
to charge a lot of money for, your gift
free. To access it, just go to
heresy.financial/stresstest.
The link is in the description below.
Fill the questionnaire, plug in your
information, I'll send you that custom
blueprint, you can get started. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.
