In 2008, the US government bailed out
the banks and then they passed a bunch
of rules to make sure that a financial
crisis would never happen again. But now
they are about to repeal those rules on
purpose. Why? Because now they need the
banks to bail out the US government. If
you don't know who I am, my name is Joe
Brown. I am a former stock broker and
now I run Heresy Financial where I help
active investors decrease portfolio risk
and increase long-term returns. So, how
did we get here? Let me catch you up to
speed. After the financial crisis hit
and the bank bailouts, the US government
passed a bunch of rules, a bunch of
laws, a bunch of regulations in order to
prevent banks from being able to take on
the same type of risk that led to the
Swift collapse. The main one that
matters to what we're talking about
today is that banks had to make sure
they had a certain amount of capital for
the assets that they have purchased. And
whatever the asset is that they are
looking at buying, there are limitations
on how much of those assets they can
buy. The goal is very simply to just
make sure that banks didn't become
overleveraged again in any investment.
And that brings us to the problem today,
which is that banks are also limited in
how many US treasuries they can buy.
Now, this makes sense because US
treasuries are not risk-free. They are
commonly considered risk-free because as
long as you hold them to maturity,
you're going to get your principle and
interest back. The only way a government
defaults on debt in a currency that it
prints is if it just chooses to default.
But that one little phrase, as long as
you can hold on until maturity, actually
matters a lot here. Because as we all
witnessed a couple of years ago, many
banks were not able to hold on to
treasuries until they matured because
there were bank runs happening and
people were withdrawing their assets,
their cash out of the bank and banks
were having to sell their treasuries.
The problem was these banks had bought
these treasuries when interest rates
were near zero and interest rates had
gone up which meant that the banks even
selling all of their treasuries were not
able to produce enough for all of the
deposit withdrawals. And if you've been
watching my channel for a while now,
then you probably know I'm a fan of
hoping for the best while preparing for
the worst. So, if you're anything like
me, you probably realize that there is a
lot of potential in the markets right
now. But there are also a growing number
of risks as well. And that's why coming
up on Thursday, June 12th at 700 p.m.
Eastern time, I'm hosting a free live
Zoom call to cover the black swan trade.
This is a completely unique strategy
that allows you to profit from
surprising events. And after using it in
my own account to take home some pretty
big returns, I'm going to share
everything I've learned with you. I'm
even going to give away a free signed
copy of Nasim Taleb's book, The Black
Swan, signed by him, not me, to somebody
during the call. All you have to do is
click on the link in the description
below, register, show up for the event.
It's on Thursday, June 12th at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern time. Again, attendance is
completely free, but spots are limited,
so don't wait. Look forward to seeing
you there. The way the Federal Reserve
handled this new risk where treasuries
were no longer risk-f free because we
are in a new environment where interest
rates are going up is that they launched
the BTFP, the bank term funding program,
which basically said if you're a bank,
you can temporarily sell your treasuries
to the Fed for full price as long as you
buy them back within a year. To put this
into a personal financial situation so
that it makes sense, imagine you borrow
a bunch of money from a friend. You take
that money and you go invest it in
Amazon, Apple, and Google. You think
you're going to make a good amount of
money and then you're going to pay them
back what you owe them. You'll be able
to keep the difference. The problem is
Apple, Google, Amazon, they all start to
fall right when your buddy asks for his
money back. So, you need to go access
the Fed's BTFP. Instead of selling those
shares on the open market for 50% of
what they're what you bought them for,
you're going to sell them to the Fed for
exactly what you paid. even though
that's not what those shares are
actually worth. The only thing you have
to promise is that you'll buy those
shares back within a year. So, of
course, you're going to do that. And
that's what every bank did that needed
it. This meant that depositors at every
bank across the country no longer had to
worry that their bank was sitting on a
ton of unrealized losses on all those
treasuries because if they needed to get
the money, they could by temporarily
selling those at full price to the Fed.
Now, the BTFP is no longer active. It
was a temporary facility that the
Federal Reserve started to deal with
that crisis and it's been shut down now.
But the precedent has been set and if
push comes to shove that or another
program like it will absolutely be
launched which means that US treasuries
for all practical purposes to a bank
basically fungeable with reserves. In
other words, kind of the same thing.
Because if a bank holds a US Treasury
with that implicit temporary Fed bailout
looming in the background, they don't
just have to hold on to it until
maturity for it to be risk-f free. They
can sell it to the Fed prior to maturity
for full price, which means no matter
what, US treasuries to banks are risk-
free. Even so, banks are still limited
in how many treasuries they can actually
purchase, which is a problem for the US
government because interest rates on US
government debt have continued to rise
with the tax cuts planned and spending
still increasing. The interest on all
the existing debt still going up. The US
government is borrowing more and more
every single year, but they have fewer
and fewer places to borrow from. This is
a chart of the Federal Reserve's balance
sheet and you can see for a couple years
now it's been declining which means that
as some of the debt that they own from
the US government gets paid back they
are not lending it all back out. Some of
it they are just letting retire. In
other words, if the US government pays
back let's say a hundred billion dollar
to the Fed that it owes to the Fed. The
Fed will turn around and maybe loan 90
billion of that back to the US
government. So the Fed is not a net
growing lender to the US government
anymore like it was during QE when the
balance sheet grows. Foreigners are also
becoming less and less of lenders to the
US government buying fewer and fewer
treasuries. One of the reasons why gold
has been in such a strong bull market
over the last couple of years because
gold is increasingly taking the place of
US treasuries on balance sheets around
the world. In other words, demand for US
government debt is declining. Right at
the same time as the US government's
appetite for borrowing is steadily
increasing. And because nobody is
jumping in to pick up the slack,
interest rates are rising. And this is
the reason why the US government is
considering bank deregulation. Even
though the rules that are set to be
repealed were set in place in order to
prevent a 2008 style crash, the crisis
that the US government is staring down
the barrel of would be worse. In other
words, if the banks collapse, that's a
big problem. If the US government runs
out of lenders, it's game over, at least
for them, not for anybody who's actually
prepared. Regulators are expected to
propose cutting the supplementary
leverage ratio this summer. And this is
something that earlier in the year,
Jerome Powell suggested could help the
Treasury market. In other words, this
would allow banks to buy either a lot
more or potentially even an unlimited
number of US treasuries. Given the fact
that for a bank, a US treasury is
risk-free if you hold on to it maturity
and it's risk- free if you can sell it
to the Fed for full price temporarily.
There would be no risk reason to prevent
banks from buying as many treasuries as
they wanted. And because US banks are
able to loan money into existence, they
would have the incentive to do so
because every treasury they buy would
just be more income for them. In other
words, all return and no risk. If these
rule changes go into effect, we unleash
major bond buying in the US Treasury
market, which would push interest rates
down across the entire yield curve. The
government will be able to roll over a
lot of their higher interest debt into
lower interest debt, which would help
out with the total cost of the national
debt right now. And if this sounds a lot
like quantitative easing, then you're
right, because this is QE just without
the Fed. In fact, the Fed's balance
sheet could still decline and the banks
would make up the slack. This is QE
through the banks. Now, there are a few
major implications for both markets and
the economy from a move like this.
Number one, we are going to have higher
prices because this allows a lot more
spending from the US government, but
their spending is money that is coming
into existence for the first time. In
other words, it's an inflationary
financing deal. It pushes prices of
assets and goods and services higher.
And even though rates on US government
debt will go down, interest rates after
maybe a brief period of falling for
everyone else, interest rates will
actually go up. This is because lenders
who do have to take on risk, in other
words, lending to people like you and me
have to compensate for the inflation
along the way. Which means that even
though the government will be borrowing
at artificially low rates from banks
doing QE, people like you and me will
actually have to pay higher interest
rates. This is also going to happen as a
result of the crowding out effect
because if you're a bank and you can
loan to the US government risk-free and
you're going to demand a higher and
higher interest rate from somebody in
the private sector who does represent
some risk, especially if that means you
have to watch out how many of those
loans you make as a bank versus loaning
to the US government. It's a lot more
free and open. So, there will be a
crowding out effect and it will actually
hamper economic activity. Now, if you're
sitting there thinking, "Oh man, I have
no idea how to play this." And if you
want me to help you, don't worry. I've
got you covered. That's why I'm hosting
the Black Swan Trade event. Remember,
it's Thursday, June 12th at 700 p.m.
Eastern time. And if you haven't done so
already, click the link in the
description below to sign up. I will see
you there. As always, thank you so much
for watching. Have a great day.