If there was ever any doubt which
markets mattered most to policymakers
and to global economies, we know now for
certain it is not the stock market. It
is in fact the bond market which has
been showing signs of extreme stress
bordering on breaking recently. Which is
why you need to watch out for the
Federal Reserve bailing out the bond
market at some point very soon. Jamie
Diamond, the CEO of Chase, recently said
that he expects a kurfuffle in the US
Treasury market that will prompt a
Federal Reserve intervention. Now, a
kurfuffle in this case means the entire
bond market breaking, liquidity seizing
up, and somebody big about to go bust go
out of business. Something like Lehman
Brothers. That's what Diamond means by
kurfuffle here. He doesn't simply mean,
oh, the tenure goes up a little bit and
government financing gets a little bit
too expensive. Kurfuffle means something
catastrophic that if it's not dealt with
could take down the global financial
system, otherwise that would not prompt
a Federal Reserve intervention. He goes
on to say here that the expected turmoil
is because of all the rules and
regulations and that he believes the
Federal Reserve will only step in when
they start to panic a little bit. Again,
this is not going to be something from
Treasury prices falling a little bit.
This is going to be something
catastrophic. Something along the lines
of September of 2019. You remember when
the Federal Reserve had been allowing
their balance sheet to decline and then
suddenly they reversed course and called
it not QT. Well, what has the Federal
Reserve been doing recently? They've
been allowing their balance sheet to
decline. When the Federal Reserve's
balance sheet goes up, that's called QE.
They're injecting liquidity. The
opposite is true as well. When the
balance sheet goes down, they're
withdrawing liquidity. This is one of
the many factors that has contributed to
interest rates on government debt going
from so low to so high over the last
couple of years. And the lack of
liquidity in the system is starting to
show through with cracks forming,
evidenced by the 10-year yield moving
from
3.88% all the way up to 4.58% in the
matter of days. A big thing happening
here is the unwind of the basis trade,
which I've talked about in a recent
video already. go back and check that
out if you haven't seen it yet. But an
underlying issue below even that is the
liquidity in the plumbing of the
financial system. When financial
institutions need to go get cash, they
need that cash to be there available to
them. In September of 2019, financial
institutions went to go get cash and it
was not there. They do this primarily
through the repo market overnight. They
go to other financial institutions and
say, "Hey, I've got some treasuries. Can
I have some cash?" Normally that works
fine until everybody goes with their
collateral. The treasuries tries to get
cash and there is none. That's why the
Federal Reserve had to step in and
provide that liquidity themselves which
is why their balance sheet started
increasing again. This is the type of
thing that Jaime Diamond is talking
about when he says he expects a
kurfuffle that will make the Fed start
to panic. Now he also said that this is
due to all the rules and regulations
that financial institutions face today.
And part of this is true as well. When
financial institutions do something that
people don't like, governments come in
and say, "You can't do that anymore."
But those financial institutions will
then say, "Okay, we need to find ways to
make money still. So within the rules
that we have set, we're going to find
different creative ways to make money."
Usually that involves levering up on
those things that are still allowed,
which causes hidden risk in the system
that blows up all at once. Now, this
last piece that Jaime Diamond said is
something that I've been predicting for
a long time, primarily because people
like him are talking about trying to
make it happen. He is advocating for
bank rule change, including exempting
treasuries from the supplementary
leverage ratio in order to avoid a
repeat of the 2020 Treasury market
seizure and allow banks to become more
active intermediaries in markets. Right
now, banks are restricted on how many
treasuries they can buy. they hit their
risk limits because treasuries can go
down in price which is what happens when
yields increase which means if the bank
has to sell that treasury they might be
selling it at a loss. Now you say,
"Wait, treasuries are supposed to be
risk-f free. As long as they can hold on
to them until maturity, there's no risk,
right?" You're absolutely right. But
that as long as they can hold on to them
until maturity piece is a really big
piece because if there's a bank run and
everybody tries to get their deposits
back, well, the banks have to sell the
assets that they have to free up the
cash. And if those assets are worth less
than when the bank bought them, then
they're out of luck. And so one
restriction that was placed on banks was
how many treasuries they're allowed to
buy in the first place. So making this
rule change would absolutely allow banks
to buy more treasuries. But it doesn't
solve the issue all by itself. You would
also need an explicit or at least an
implicit guarantee by the Fed that if
something were to happen in terms of a
bank run that the bank could temporarily
sell those treasuries to the Fed for
full price. So the Fed could hold on to
them until maturity or the bank could
purchase them back from the Fed at a
future point in time. Now, do we have
any recent history, any precedent being
set for the Fed doing this? Why yes, I'm
glad you asked. Over the last couple of
years, the Federal Reserve established
something called the bank term funding
program specifically in order to allow
the bailout of banks like Silicon Valley
Bank so that any banks that had
treasuries that had unrealized losses on
them could temporarily sell them to the
Fed, buy them back later. Now, this
program has been shuttered for now, but
they could always bring it back, which
means that treasuries could basically be
viewed as reserves for banks. And that's
exactly what banks and their executives
like Diamond are pushing for. And it
seems like the Federal Reserve is aware
that problems are going to pop up soon
that will require their intervention
because you're seeing headlines like
this where the Federal Reserve has
stated they are absolutely ready to
stabilize the market if needed and that
they are prepared to act with various
tools. Now the other important piece
here is that it's not just the Federal
Reserve. When you take a look at the
Treasury under this new Trump
administration, it's led by Scott
Besson, who has made it very clear that
the only priority here is a lower
10-year yield, which as of right now,
this administration has accomplished the
exact opposite. But it still could lead
to getting their end result if it forces
the Federal Reserve to bail the system
out. If the Fed has to return to an
emergency QE program and buy up a bunch
of US treasuries, that could absolutely
send the yields on government bonds
plummeting and the prices of those
treasuries soaring. So, a temporary
hiccup like this may not actually be
something that is putting a permanent
dent in their plan. In fact, it may be a
necessary step along their way to get
those rates lower. Because let's be
honest, with all of the spending, and
yes, this administration, I'm talking
about spending increases, despite what
DOA is doing, and the proposed tax cuts,
the free market is not going to be
lowering these interest rates for the
government by themselves. It's going to
have to come with some central
intervention. And it's not even just
Scott Bessant here that cares about the
yield on the 10-year. It's President
Trump himself. He explicitly stated
during this recent round of tariffs
being implemented and then being paused
that the reason he paused tariffs was
not because the stock market was
falling. It's because he said he was
watching the bond market and he could
tell people were getting queasy. He has
also recently begun tweeting at the
Federal Reserve again telling them that
they need to be lowering rates. And
well, we've seen this game play out
before and we know how it ends. From a
growth perspective, it makes sense why
you'd want to focus on the 10-year.
Because if you can get the 10-year
lower, that means lower mortgage rates.
That means lower credit card rates. That
means lower auto loan rates. That means
lower financing costs for business and
corporate debt, which is simply just
more spending stimulating growth. It's
fuel to the fire of an inflationary
deleveraging and a credit boom, but it
still shows up as growth nonetheless. So
because of that, personally, I would not
bet against it. Which means that this
bare market we're looking at in the
stock market is on borrowed time. It is
almost done and over. Which means the
sales that you are seeing on some of
these stocks that are some of the
world's best assets to own are sales
that will not be lasting that much
longer. And if you don't know how to
take advantage of it, how to filter the
companies, the good ones from the bad
ones, how to calculate what is actually
a sale. How do I know if this company is
actually trading at a discount to its
intrinsic value? If you don't know how
to do any of that, you need my bare
market investing guide. I've made it
just for time periods like this one, and
it's only going to be on a crazy sale
until this bare market is over. By then,
it's too late. If you're interested in
building your fortune while there's
blood in the streets, go ahead and get
that linked in the description below. As
always, thanks so much for watching.
Have a great day.