If you're an investor who has lent money
to a company, but now you're kind of
concerned that the company may default
on its debt to you, you may buy a
special type of insurance contract
called a credit default swap. But today,
investors are buying that default
insurance on the US government itself.
Not only that, but the price to buy that
insurance to protect yourself against a
US debt default has now spiked to a
level that we haven't seen since the
financial crisis. So, why are investors
today paying more for these credit
default swaps? Good question. I'm glad
you asked. First up, what is a credit
default swap and how does it work? If
you have children, you probably have
life insurance. And if you don't, you
need to go get some term life insurance
today. The reason why you have life
insurance is because you as the parent
to the children provide the income that
they need. But if something were to
happen to you and you pass away, you'd
no longer be able to provide the income
for your children that they need to
survive. And so you can purchase life
insurance that will provide a lump sum
of money that will be able to provide
for your children in your absence. Now,
here's the thing. If you're really old
and if you're really sick and if you
engage in a lot of lifethreatening
activities like skydiving and traveling
around the world to dangerous countries,
it will be very very expensive for you
to purchase life insurance because the
life insurance provider understands that
they've got a pretty high certainty that
they're going to need to pay it out. And
so the cost of insuring against that
loss of income for your dependent will
go up or down depending on the perceived
likelihood of actually needing it. A
credit default swap is the exact same
thing. A credit default swap is very
simply an insurance policy that you
purchase from somebody else that says,
"Hey, if the United States defaults on
their debt to me, then you're going to
have to pay me a certain number of
dollars." The key thing to note here is
that it is a third party. Just like with
life insurance, you're not purchasing
this protection from the US government.
It is financial institutions signing
these contracts between each other. The
financial institutions who are selling
this insurance believe that they are
being compensated enough and that the US
probably will not default. But as that
chance of default goes up, the people
selling this insurance are going to
charge more and more and also the people
buying this insurance are going to be
willing to pay more and more. If you
take a look at this chart here, you can
see where we are right now with the
price of one-year credit default swaps
on US government debt. You can see in
the fallout of the financial crisis,
there were a few times where the price
of these credit default swaps did reach
the levels we are seeing now. But if you
look closer towards where we are today,
you can see that it looks like these
costs are more of a sustained rise and
not just brief spikes. For instance,
pretty much the last couple of years,
we've seen the price of credit default
swaps stay above the level that they
were at in this lower range from 2008
all the way through 2014 and especially
from 14 through 21. The question is why
is the cost of credit default swaps
surging right now? Well, the simple
answer is obviously just that investors,
both buyers and sellers of these swaps,
are pricing in a higher likelihood of
the US government actually defaulting.
there's more demand for this insurance.
And if you think this is stupid because
a government can never default on its
debt as long as it's debt in a currency
that the government can print, don't
worry. They actually can default here
and I will explain that in just a
moment. The first reason why is because
of the US government's budget deficit as
a percentage of GDP. You can see during
fiscal year 2024, it reached 6.28%.
If we draw a line straight across at 6%
for the last 100 years, you can see the
only time it got worse than 6% was in
the middle of World War II. Clearly, we
are not in the middle of a world war
right now. So, the US government should
not be running deficits to that level.
And yet, basically, since the financial
crisis, our deficits have been getting
worse and worse. Again, this is as a
percentage of GDP. So this is how much
the government is spending in excess of
what they're taxing compared to the size
of the overall economy. So this is in
context or in perspective and it's still
getting worse. But it's not just the
deficit compared to the size of the
economy. Currently the United States
total national debt is at 120% compared
to our GDP. Again, the last time we were
here was in the middle of World War II.
This means our debt to GDP ratio is also
unsustainable because again we don't
have a war to just end right now. And
then finally when you take a look at the
total federal receipts in other words
how much money the US government takes
in taxes as a percent of the size of the
economy you can see that basically since
the 40s this number really can't get
higher. About the minimum the US
government takes in taxes is 15% of GDP
and about the maximum it takes is 20%.
But it usually stays even closer in
between a range of 15 to 17%. The reason
for this is very simple. If you increase
tax rates, usually that slows the
economy down. So the total tax revenue
also goes down. If you decrease tax
rates, that increases economic growth
which increases tax revenue. Which means
that either way you are going to be
taking a very similar amount of money
compared to the size of the overall
economy. Which is why we've seen this
number so stable throughout the decades
despite the fact we've had very
different people in power, very
different tax systems in place, very
different tax rates in place throughout
the years. So they can't tax more
because that slows the economy down too
much. They can't borrow more because at
120% debt to GDP ratio, that's causing
interest rates to get too high to the
point where it's more expensive to
borrow. And with the deficit getting
worse and worse compared to the size of
the economy every year, you'd think the
solution would just be to spend less.
And for a while, that is what it looked
like this administration was going to
try to accomplish. But that has been
thrown out the window now as it looks
like both Congress and the executive
branch are pushing to spend like a
drunken sailor just got introduced to
cocaine. And this is why investors are
suddenly paying so much more for default
insurance on US government debt. Because
it's true, the US can actually default.
Now, if you're not sure whether this is
going to push markets up higher into a
meltup or if it's going to cause a
cataclysmic collapse, then I want you to
save this date on your calendar, June
12th. It's a Thursday at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern time, cuz I'm hosting a free
live Zoom call where I'm going to be
covering one of my favorite investing
strategies for uncertain times just like
we're seeing right now. It's called the
Black Swan Trade. This event is going to
be completely different than anything
I've hosted before. We're going to cover
things like why some of the best hedge
fund managers believe 2025 will be full
of black swan events. I'll show you how
I used this strategy to take home a
1,793% return in just 11 days during a
market crash. I'll show you the
difference between identifying black
swans and gray swans and how you can set
yourself up to profit from either one.
And I'll show you the details of three
potential gray swans that I'm concerned
about and watching right now. And plus,
I'm even going to give away a signed
copy of Nasim Taleb's book, The Black
Swan. You can see it is signed by him
right here. I don't know if you can see
it on the camera, but this book worth
hundreds of dollars. I'm going to give
it away free to somebody on the call.
All you have to do is sign up, register
for the event by clicking on the link in
the description below. Show up on
Thursday, June 12th at 700 p.m. Eastern
time. And as always, attendance is free,
but spots are limited. So don't wait
until it's too late. Go ahead and sign
up now. I'll see you there. So, why do
so many people say the US government
cannot default on its debt as long as
they owe money that they can print?
Well, in theory, that makes sense. If I
owe you Joe Bucks and I am the only one
with the monopoly on being able to
create Joe Bucks, then how in the world
could I default? All I have to do is go
to my printer, print up more Joe Bucks,
and hand them to you. It literally costs
me zero. Well, unfortunately in the real
world, it's not actually just that
simple. Now, it is true that the US
government can print dollars, but in
practice, the process is very
distributed and it's not under the
control of the US Treasury. The ability
to create new money rests with banks who
have banking licenses and then that is
backed up by the Federal Reserve. The
Federal Reserve is given its power by
Congress and then the people in charge
at the Federal Reserve are appointed by
the president and then confirmed by
Congress. So what does that have to do
with defaulting? Well, the fact is that
spending money is underneath the control
of Congress and that means passing the
bill that details how and how much money
they're going to spend. This means that
if Congress doesn't come to a decision
on how much money they're going to spend
and how they're going to spend it, they
actually can't spend money. And if they
can't spend money, that also means they
can't pay back money that they owe. This
is why government shutdowns and spending
bills always bring up the discussion of
debt default. Because if there is enough
political gridlock, then defaulting on
the debt would be something that would
happen. Now, in reality, what would
probably happen is there would be a
temporary default and then those
treasuries would get paid back anyway a
little bit late. But the damage would
have already been done by that point and
investors around the world would have
been dumping treasuries like crazy. This
would push interest rates skyhigh which
would mean somebody else would have to
come in and buy up all of those
treasuries in order to stop the global
financial system from spiraling out of
control and that would be the Federal
Reserve restarting QE. But at the end of
the day, that is why investors are
starting to pay more and more for this
default insurance because it is becoming
abundantly clear to anybody who looks
that the United States is on an
unsustainable fiscal path. They are
borrowing too much money, spending too
much money, and the economy is not
growing nearly fast enough to outpace
the reckless and irresponsible spending
by the government. And there are a few,
not many, but there are a few people
left in Congress that are trying to stop
these reckless, crazy bills from getting
passed to spend way more money because
Congress as a whole doesn't have the
courage to do what is right and spend
less. Which means there's a growing
nonzero chance that gridlock causes
default. That is worth protecting
against. Now, if you're wondering, okay,
what are the implications for the
average investor? Well, number one,
austerity is gone. This was basically
the one chance that I have ever seen
that we might actually see this fiscal
path turned around and that got thrown
out the window a couple of months ago.
Spending will never stop. It will never
slow down. It will never turn around.
Which means that assuming we don't have
default. What we will see is an
inflationary deleveraging. In other
words, the United States in conjunction
with banks and the Fed will print money
in order to pay its bills to pay back
the money it owes and to pay for its
future expenses. This means prices will
go up. This means assets will go up. And
this means interest rates for everybody
but the government will go up. So
prepare accordingly. And if we do have
the crazy event of a debt default, it
means there's a lot of money that's
going to be running into things like
gold, a lot of money that's going to be
running into things like Bitcoin, and
financial institutions especially are
going to be in deep, deep trouble if the
Fed doesn't come in with a rescue
bailout very quickly. Prepare
accordingly. And again, if you want to
know what I am doing to prepare for
these uncertain events, don't forget to
register for my black swan trade event.
Link is in the description below. I will
see you there. As always, thank you so
much for watching. Have a great day.