Well, that only took 12 days.
12 days from the time that the Fed ended
QT until they restarted the next round
of QE. For context, this is the Fed's
balance sheet and they have been
reducing their holdings of assets on
their balance sheet since 2022. That has
been quantitative tightening. They
recently announced quantitative
tightening would come to an end on
December 1st and their balance sheet
would remain the same size. But on
Wednesday, December 10th, they announced
they were going to start buying
treasuries yet again, beginning on
December 12th, which means they lasted
only 12 days between ending QT and
restarting the next round of QE. Now,
there are some key nuances here that are
important to know, but it's just funny
because on October 29th at the last Fed
meeting when they announced that they
would be ending QT, I tweeted and I
said, "How long do you think until QE
restarts?" Now, there were some of you
who said 6 months or less than a year.
And others of you who jokingly said that
they would restart QE on December 2nd,
right after QT, 2 minutes after QT ends,
and December 2nd again. And while I'm
sure you guys were joking with those
comments, turned out to be as close as
you possibly could have gotten to
reality. So here we're going to take a
look at the implementation notes from
the most recent FOMC statement happened
just a few days ago on December 10th.
And like I said, the nuance matters here
and it shows you that money printing has
started up again. QE by any other name
is still QE. And it's always important
to look at the implementation notes. For
reference, when you look up the actual
statement that the FOMC releases after
their meetings, all you have to do is
scroll down to the bottom and click on
the implementation note for that
statement, and that'll give you the
details about how they are implementing
their new policy. Now, most of this is
normal, what you would expect. They're
going to undertake open market
operations to make sure that the Fed
funds rate stays between their new range
which is now lower between 3 and a half
and 3 and 3/4 of a percent. What they do
in the reverse repo and the repo market
is going to continue to maintain
interest rates overnight where they want
and it's this third bullet point that we
really need to look at and this was the
big shocker for the entire market. The
Fed will be increasing the system open
market account holdings of securities
through purchases of Treasury bills and
if needed other Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3 years or less
to maintain an ample level of reserves.
And I'm going to explain that here. But
first, let's go to that fourth bullet
point that they are rolling over at
auction all principal payments from the
Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury
securities. And they're reinvesting all
principal payments from the Federal
Reserve's holdings of agency securities
into Treasury bills. This last bullet
point is what I've been talking about
for the last month and a half on what
the Federal Reserve started to do on
December 1st. They're continuing to
drain off their holdings of
mortgagebacked securities from their
balance sheet. and new leadership at the
Fed has indicated they want to
eventually hold none of these. They're
trying to completely get rid of holding
mortgage back securities. So, they're
still letting those roll off their
balance sheet. Any money that they get
paid back from those, they're taking
that money and loaning that back out to
the US government instead. So, QT for
mortgages, QE back into T bills for the
government, general easing in that way.
And then any money that gets paid back
to them from the government when T bills
or treasuries mature, they just roll
that straight back over, loan that right
back out to the US government, buy more
treasuries. So nothing in this fourth
bullet point should be a surprise to
you, unless this is the very first video
that you've ever watched from me. In
that case, welcome. Glad to have you. So
this third bullet point was the real
surprise that nobody was expecting. And
it all sounds like gibberish to you. It
means that they're going to be
purchasing more treasury bills and
treasuries than just keeping their
holdings the same. Up until this point,
they have stated their intention to just
let their balance sheet stay the exact
same, but now they will actually be
adding to that and buying more. Now, the
stated goal of this is reserve
management. I will explain what that
means in a moment, but the result of
that is that for the first 30 days, the
initial round will be about $40 billion
of net Treasury bill purchases for the
first 30 days. They said this is a move
to ease short-term funding costs. For
the last couple of years, the Federal
Reserve has been doing the exact
opposite. They've been trying to drain
reserves from the system because they
said we were in an abundant or an
excessive reserves environment. So QT
for the last couple of years has had the
express purpose of reducing reserves.
And now just 12 days after that process
came to an end, they're reversing course
and saying, "Well, we actually went too
far. We need to purchase more of these
yet again in order to make sure we still
have ample reserves." And again, that
means buying $40 billion worth of
Treasury bills. Now, treasury bills,
just in case you aren't aware, there's
treasury bills, treasury notes, and
treasury bonds. Those are all government
debt instruments. It's just a difference
in when that debt matures. And if we go
to the Treasury's website,
treasurydirect.gov,
we can see bills. T bills are shortterm
debt instruments that mature in one year
or less. Notes are medium short to
medium-term debt securities that mature
in either 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 years. And
then Treasury bonds are long-term
securities that mature in 20 or 30
years. But these are just arbitrary
lines that have been drawn in the sand.
These are all debt instruments. It's
just different ways the government
borrows from people or institutions and
different time frames for when they pay
you back your principal. The reason why
this matters is because historically
anytime the Fed is buying something like
Treasury bills, they say, "Hey, this is
not for general easing. This is not to
get prices to go up. This is not to
combat deflation. This is not for any
purpose other than just reserve
management. We want to make sure there's
no liquidity crisis. This is exactly
what they said back in September of 2019
after the repo market blew up. You can
see their balance sheet started heading
higher again. And when they started
buying tea bills during this time,
everybody was losing their minds because
Jerome Pal came out and said, "Nope,
this is not QE because this is not for
easing. This is for liquidity, but at
the end of the day, the Fed is still
printing money and purchasing US
government debt with it. Regardless of
how the financial system uses T bills
versus notes versus bonds for liquidity
or reserves or holding assets long term,
the net result overall is the same. More
money is being printed into existence
and lent to the US government. And that
is exactly what's going to happen from
here. This is why everybody called it
not QE at the time because QE had gone
through multiple rounds. There was QE1,
QE2, QE 3, and then now when the Federal
Reserve in 2019 started buying T bills
and they said it was not QE, we just
called it not QE in quotes because we
all knew that's exactly what it is. Now,
here's a question that I'm not sure the
answer to yet, but I'm sure we will find
out soon. I don't know if the balance
sheet itself will actually move up. Now,
one reason why this is important is
because in the implementation notes, it
says that the Fed will be purchasing
Treasury bills and if needed, other
Treasury securities with remaining
maturities of 3 years or less, which
means this is actually different than
the last time because the last time they
did it just for reserve management, it
was strictly T bills. But this time
they're saying, "Hey, well, we might
need to also do two-year notes,
three-year notes because, you know, we
may need to."
So, they are extending it out across a
larger area of the yield curve, even
though they're stating it is still just
to maintain an ample level of reserves.
They have more flexibility now with what
they're buying. Now, the reason why I'm
making such a big deal about this is
because I think it's important that
people understand the net results of
this because we don't really need to get
caught up in everything the Fed says
about the reason why they're doing it
and okay, we're doing bills or we're
doing up to three years and before when
we were doing QE for actual QE purposes,
we were buying across the entire yield
cone of that matters. The result is the
money supply is expanding. The effect of
the money supply expanding is that your
prices go up. Gold goes up, Bitcoin goes
up, real estate goes up, groceries go
up, gas goes up, cars go up, your wages
eventually later on go up. An expanding
money supply is a tide that lifts all
boats unequally at different times. And
if you're not positioned accordingly,
you may be left on the wrong side of the
fence. Yes, I know I just mixed two
metaphors or analogies there, but you
get the point. This is a chart of the
total money supply in the United States.
And you can see after the brief hiatus
of the money supply shrinking during QT,
the money supply actually started
expanding again all the way back in 2023
and has been going up ever since. We
never got anywhere near the path that it
was on prior to all the money printing
in 2020. And if you go to the Fed's
website and you look up this chart, it
is WM2NS. that is the M2 money supply.
And then you click edit graph. And
instead of showing the total number, the
billions of dollars in the money supply,
you change it to percent change from a
year ago. Now you can see the rate of
change in the actual money supply. And
yes, the money supply was shrinking. The
rate of growth was negative for a brief
period of time, but it is now growing at
a rate of 4.4%.
And that is annual. The percent change
in the money supply from last year at
this time to right now is 4.4%. 4%. Now,
that doesn't mean that the exact level
of price inflation will also equal 4.4%
because there are other factors
affecting that like growth. If something
gets cheaper because a producer figures
out a way to make it cheaper, produce it
more cost-effectively, then that
deflationary force will offset some of
the monetary inflationary force. So,
growth offsets inflation and vice versa.
That means it is next to impossible to
actually measure what the real rate of
inflation is. But if everything else
stays the same and the money supply
grows, prices grow. And so looking at
the growth rate of the money supply
gives you a good starting point at the
very least. And the key part here is
it's headed higher. We have seen the
money supply growth rate go from
negative territory to now at 4.4%
without the Fed. Remember, this whole
time they've been draining their balance
sheet. And only now are they lowering
interest rates, ending the draining of
their balance sheet, and now restarting
QE, which means we have more fuel added
to the fire of monetary inflation,
monetary expansion, more money supply
being a rising tide that lifts all
boats. Position yourself accordingly.
And finally, if you're not aware, I have
a free newsletter where I send out deep
dives on topics that I actually don't
make YouTube videos about. It's not just
a rehash of my YouTube channel. So, if
you'd like to see me in your inbox every
week, click on the link in the
description below and sign up for my
free newsletter. As always, thank you so
much for watching. Have a great day.