US Treasury bonds, the so-called safest
assets in the world, just got downgraded
again, and nobody's talking about what
it actually means. My name is Joe Brown,
and I run Heresy Financial, where we
publish investment research and
education for active investors. But
before that, I was a stock broker for
years. I worked with the top 1%, many of
whom were consistently invested in the
cookie cutter 6040 stock bond portfolio.
And if that's you, you're going to want
to pay attention because this right here
could impact your returns for decades.
So here's what happened. You are looking
right now at the Moodings ratings
downgrade on US government debt. You can
see that the rating was dropped down
from AAA to AA1. You can see also while
they did drop the rating to AA1, they
also changed the outlook to stable from
negative. This is a one notch downgrade
on their 21 notch rating scale. If you
scroll down, you can see their ratings
rationale on why they downgraded to A1.
In their own words, for over a decade,
US federal debt has risen sharply due to
continuous fiscal deficits. During that
time, federal spending has increased
while tax cuts have reduced government
revenues. As both deficits and the debt
have grown and interest rates have
risen, interest payments on government
debt have increased marketkedly. In
other words, the amount of money the US
government borrows every year has been
growing. Now, that has been from a
combination of lower taxes at some
times, but also way more spending every
single year. The second reason for the
downgrade was because interest rates
have been rising. Which means on the
entire pile of the national debt, just
the cost of servicing the national debt
has been going higher and higher and
higher. Interest payments on the
national debt by themselves are soon
going to be the largest expense in the
entire federal budget. And so because
the combination of these reasons,
Moody's has now downgraded US government
debt, which means they're saying the
likelihood of default is slightly higher
than it was before. But guess what?
They're missing the point. Risk of
default is not the risk that you should
be paying attention to when looking at
US government debt. Don't get me wrong,
it is kind of a slight risk, but not
really. As modern monetary theorists
love to point out, you cannot be forced
to default on debt if you borrow in a
currency you can print because you can
print an infinite amount of currency in
order to pay back your debt. However, as
modern monetary theorists love to
ignore, the number of dollars has
nothing to do with the purchasing power
of those dollars. Let me give you an
example to illustrate what I'm talking
about here. Let's say tomorrow the
government decides, hey, we're going to
have the Federal Reserve print up a
billion dollars per person. We're going
to deposit a billion dollars in every
single person's checking account. I
think anybody with half a brain cell
would realize that immediately we would
have hyperinflation. The dollar would
become virtually worthless overnight.
Prices would immediately rocket upwards
in order to compensate for all the new
money floating around in the system and
being spent. The price of everyday
household items like milk or a gallon of
gas would cost millions to maybe even
hundreds of millions of dollars. Now,
obviously something like that is not
going to happen anytime soon. In our
reality, things are a lot more
incremental. They are printing money.
It's not a billion dollars for every
person, but they are printing money
fairly rapidly. And as they print money
for their spending and to pay their
debt, dollars become worth less. Not
worthless, just worth less. because
those new dollars have purchasing power
only as a result of pulling it away from
all existing dollars. This means that
when you are a bond holder and you hold
US government debt like a 10-year
Treasury and you get paid 4.5% every
single year until maturity, even though
that is a positive nominal rate, you're
getting 4.5% back on your money. Most of
the time throughout history, it is a
negative real rate, which means after
adjusting for inflation, you're still
losing purchasing power. In other words,
your dollars in your bank account might
go from $100 to $15, but over that same
amount of time, the stuff that used to
cost $100 now costs $110. Yes, your
dollars went up, but your purchasing
power went down. which means that in a
bestcase scenario when you loan money to
the US government especially for the
long term you are losing a little bit of
money and as Moody's has recently
pointed out the risk of a worstc case
scenario in which they just decide to
default just became slightly higher but
wait there's
more in like a reverse infomercial here
that's not even the worst part because
it's not just US government bonds that
are affected by this when you Look at a
bond market ETF like BND from Vanguard.
This is a fund that takes your money and
buys corporate bonds with this. Which
means your money instead of getting lent
to like the US government by buying a
treasury, it's getting lent to large
corporations. They pay you interest
along the way and then when the bond
matures, they pay you back your
principal. Funds like BND take your
money and spread it out over many, many
bonds. And you can see the performance
of this has been pretty terrible. That's
because as interest rates go up, the
value of those bonds go down. Which
means if you have to exit those bonds
prior to maturity, you lose money. The
interest you collected along the way was
not enough to make up for it. And even
if you do decide to hold on to them
until maturity, corporate bonds are
still subject to inflation, just like
treasuries are. Yes, typically corporate
bonds will have a little bit of a higher
interest rate to accommodate for the
little bit higher likelihood of default,
but the dollars you get back are still
having their purchasing power sucked
away from them by inflation just like
all dollars are. And in fact, as the
national debt pile grows, this problem
gets worse and worse and worse because
they are forced to print more and more
money all along the way just to keep
making the payments. So even when you
loan money to a corporation by buying a
corporate bond, you loan $100 and you
might get $106 back. But again, if the
cost of everything else went from 100 to
110, again, you're still losing, which
means the 6040 stock bond portfolio is
dead. This portfolio grew in popularity
because there was a 40-year bond bull
market as interest rates dropped from
1980 to 2020, which means every
investment advisor still alive and
working today has only existed during a
time period in which bonds go up over
time from interest rates dropping. But
that ended in 2020. And we are now in a
period of time that will look much more
like 1940 through 1980 than it will the
last 40 years. Because from 1940 through
1980, the government had to do exactly
what they have to do today, which is
delever. So they print money to pay
their debt. That means the real interest
rate after adjusting for inflation is
negative. Not only that, but the
diversification that bonds are supposed
to provide for you in your portfolio,
it's almost gone today. Increasingly
lately, the correlation between stocks
and bonds is growing, which means that
they fall together and rise together.
They fall together, they rise together.
It used to be common knowledge that if
your stocks are going down, your bonds
would go up. And if your bonds are going
down, your stocks would go up, providing
you a hedge against that volatility in
your account. And today, because so much
money is invested in both stocks and
bonds. When people are selling, they're
selling both. And when they're buying,
they're buying both, which means a
correlation is high, and you no longer
have that protection against volatility.
It is more and more a fiction of the
past. Now, I've put together what I
believe is the solution to this problem,
and it's called the hedged hyperrowth
portfolio blueprint. With this program,
I walk you through exactly what you need
to do to protect your portfolio from
both inflation and crashes. But even
more importantly, maintain exposure to
massive upside potential. In other
words, I've created a stepbystep plan
that anyone can follow so that your
account can weather any storm and you
can find hyperrowth assets to invest in.
If that sounds like something you're
interested in, the link is in the
description below. As always, thank you
so much for watching.