The US economy is now officially
shrinking. You can see here during
quarter 1 or the first 3 months of 2025,
GDP actually declined. And this is the
first time this has happened since 2022.
One more quarter of this means we are in
an official recession. Unless of course
they change the rules again like they
did last time about what counts as an
official recession. But that brings up a
good point that you and I don't actually
care about whether it's an official
recession or not. what we actually care
about and what most normal people care
about. How is it going to impact my
wallet? How is it going to impact my
ability to care for those who I'm
responsible for? Let's take a look. I'm
Joe Brown. I'm a former stock broker.
Now I run Heresy Financial where I teach
active investors how to decrease
portfolio risk and increase long-term
returns. And understanding what is going
on in the economy is going to give you
the ability to play that better. So,
first let's go back to this chart of
GDP. And you can see that during quarter
1 of this year, the US economy shrank.
The last time this happened was all the
way back in 2022, which was a result of
the hangover of all of the money
printing from 2020 and 2021. Now, this
chart is a bar graph, which shows each
quarter's change from the prior quarter.
But to put this into a little bit better
perspective, we can also just take a
look at this chart, which is the
cumulative value of GDP in billions of
dollars. Now this chart is real GDP so
it is adjusted for inflation and you can
see through the years normally GDP
increases obviously during 2020 we had
the big drop in GDP and then after all
the money printing here's that hangover
I was talking about where in the first
quarter of 2022 and the second quarter
of 2022 we had a fall and then a
flatline in GDP before it took off
again. Fast forward to today we now have
another fall in GDP in quarter 1 of
2025. Now, obviously, tariffs are the
biggest headlines that have been making
waves for the last couple of weeks and
couple of months, leading to a lot of
economic uncertainty. To put the current
Trump tariffs in context, historically,
we can see the effective tariff rate
going back all the way to the late
1700s. And while we don't know what the
actual tariff implementation will end up
being here over the next couple of
quarters and couple of years, as it
stands right now, historically, this is
extremely high. We have to go all the
way back to the 1800s before we see
tariffs in the levels they're currently
sitting at. This has created a lot of
uncertainty as we are seeing from the
global trade policy uncertainty index
even compared to Trump's first term
which is in gray here. As a result of
these tariffs, expectations about
inflation over the coming year are the
highest they've been since 1981. And
expectations about inflation over the
next 5 to 10 years are at the highest
they've been since 1991. In addition,
optimism among small business owners has
plunged, which makes sense because small
businesses are not as agile and able to
adapt to instant rising prices from
things like tariffs, which could wipe
out their entire profit margin
overnight, which is one of the reasons
why we've seen the stock market plummet
with the worst first 100 days of
performance out of the last three
presidents, including Trump's first
term. Okay, so it's very clear there is
a general sense of unease and
uncertainty and a huge lack of optimism
about the economy right now and that's
being projected forward into the future.
But there actually is some really good
silver lining here. This silver lining
comes down to the main causes in the
drop in GDP. Essentially, there were two
big things that caused GDP to go
negative this quarter, which was the
trade deficit and the government itself.
So why are these silver linings? Well,
first let's take a look at the trade
deficit. You can see the last couple of
months the trade deficit has absolutely
exploded. This was 100% an effort to
frontr run tariffs, which means one of
two things will happen here. Either, and
I'm going to talk about extremes here.
Obviously, we could have somewhere in
between, but at the extremes, either the
tariffs completely go away, in which
case all that front running ends up
being unnecessary. All that extra supply
hits the shelves, it hits inventory and
it gets made up for in the following
months by a lack of trade deficit. In
other words, a lack of imports because
those imports have already happened for
now. Now we just have to work through
them and then we can resume business as
usual. On the other end of the extreme,
if we do have these tariffs go into
effect, we're even higher than what we
are currently anticipating, well then
this trade deficit here that was simply
just imports frontr running tariffs will
still be followed up by a lack of
imports. In other words, over the next
couple of months, no matter what happens
here, this trade deficit will shrink
wildly. That doesn't make any sense.
Basically, what's happening here is
imagine you got a notification from
Walmart or Costco that your favorite
brand of paper towels is going to double
in price next month. Well, the rational
thing to do here would be to go to the
store and load up on a bunch of paper
towels now while the price is still
cheap. But guess what? It doesn't
actually matter what happens in a month
from now or in two months from now.
You're only going to use so many paper
towels, which means whether the price
actually doubles or triples or doesn't
change at all, you are not going to be
buying more paper towels next month or
the month after cuz you've already
bought all the paper towels you need
right now. You stocked up on them and
now you have to work through that
supply. That's exactly what you're
seeing going on here with the trade
deficit exploding. It's just front
running tariffs, which means all that
supply has to be worked through and
imports are going to drastically slow
down over the coming months no matter
what. And as you can see here, right on
schedule, container bookings from China
to the US are rapidly declining. In
fact, these are down
45% year-over-year, which demonstrates
that all of the normal imports were just
rushed and squeezed into the last couple
of months, which means that on net
overall over the next year or so, this
is all kind of just going to smooth out
and net out against each other. Okay,
but what about the second part
contributing to the decline in GDP? that
is government spending cuts and
government layoffs. Government's
contribution to GDP overall was a
negative.25% and is the first time that
this was a negative number since 2022.
This is fantastic for one reason and
that's because anything the government
does is a net detractor of overall real
wealth. Whether it's a regulation,
whether it's an employee, whether it's a
tax, or whether it is spending, anytime
the government takes any action in the
economy, it is changing something to be
other than what it would have been
without that intervention. The way that
human action works is that we all
individually subjectively choose what
will be the most valuable action for us
in the moment at that time given all the
available resources we have. Which means
that when our behavior is forced to
change through regulation or taxes or
spending or because a federal employee
decides to do something, we are not able
to do the thing that we value most
highly. We have to do something that we
value less highly instead. This is why
the smaller a government is overall in
terms of total employees, in terms of
total taxes, in terms of total spending,
and in terms of regulatory power, the
wealthier the economy is. Now, it is
true that the amount of deregulation and
spending cuts and tax cuts that are
currently in place are absolutely
nowhere near what was being promised by
the current administration on the
campaign trail. Many people say just
wait. These things take time. But we've
already seen backpedaling on a lot of
things. Talking about a $2 trillion cut
in spending going down to a $1 trillion
cut in spending, going down to $160
billion cut in spending from the
Department of Governmental Efficiency.
We've already seen backpedaling talking
about shrinking the military's budget to
now expanding the military's budget.
Don't get me wrong, any surgical removal
of a tumor off of a body is good, but
don't pretend like what has been done so
far is a huge deal. Nothing that has
been done so far is going to do anything
to slow down the growth of the deficit,
the growth of the debt, the runaway
interest costs on that debt, and
therefore the subsequent printing and
higher rates for everybody else. It's
going to take much, much more than
slashing a few software programs with
licenses for a few more people than we
actually have in these departments. But
what about markets? Initially, the stock
market dropped in pre-market trading as
soon as the decline in GDP information
hit the news. The market digested that
information as being negative for the
stock market, starting to price in the
odds of a recession. But as you can see,
as the day went on and the market
digested that information more and more,
the market recovered and then towards
the end of the day into aftermarket
hours trading, the stock market started
to spike. The reason for this is because
after hours a few large companies
reported earnings and they beat
expectations. Zooming out, we can see
that it looks like the worst has already
now been priced in. And even if an
official recession is confirmed in a
couple of months, it is very likely that
the bare market will have been already
fully recovered from by then. Markets
are future discounting machines, which
means they're always trying to price
into the present, whatever outcome in
the future is most likely, which means
by the time the outcome is certain, the
price has already gone there and passed.
The NASDAQ dropped 25% from top to
bottom so far, which means that this
bare market is likely almost over or
already done. Which means if you're not
taking advantage of it and buying
fantastic companies at even better
prices, you are going to be very sorry
you didn't do that in the next couple of
quarters and couple of years. And you're
just going to be holding on, hoping for
another bare market and another pullback
so you can take advantage of it next
time. Don't let that opportunity pass.
Bare markets don't come that often. If
you don't know what companies you should
be buying and most importantly what
price you should be buying them at, you
need my bare market investing guide. It
will only be on a crazy discount until
this bare market is over, which at this
rate looks to be very soon here. If you
don't have it yet, get it with the link
in the description below. As always,
thanks so much for watching. Have a
great day.