Is it possible that a massive bull
market, a rip your face off rally, a
blowoff top is about to start
in the stock market? Well, that's what
it looks like the data is pointing to.
So, I'm going to show you the data that
I'm looking at, and obviously you can
make up your own mind. First, I'd like
to take a trip back in time to around
May of this year, 2025. pointing you to
this chart at the end here is retail
buying in the stock market. This is the
number of consecutive weeks that retail
individuals, small investors, dumb money
were just plowing into stocks. Which
means that during the entire bare market
and recovery, it was small investors,
retail individuals who were buying,
buying, buying like crazy. Obviously,
you can see that since then, retail
individuals have done very well. The
crazy part about this is it wasn't just
that retail investors were buying, it's
who was selling. Kobesci letter pointed
out that according to Bank of America
during that time, hedge funds had sold a
record $1.5 billion and institutional
clients had dumped approximately $2.7
billion, which was the second largest
amount in history. Which means this
entire dump happened as institutional
investors were selling and retail
investors were buying it all up as fast
as they could. Now, you might think,
well, now would be a good time for
retail investors to cash out then
because it's not that common that small
money beats dumb money. And you might be
thinking that by now with the stock
market at all-time highs, having a very
impressive bull market behind it, that
institutional money must be fully
allocated at this point. And
surprisingly, that's not what the data
shows right now. First of all, this is
the Goldman Sachs US equity sentiment
indicator. And you can see that Goldman
Sachs sentiment indicator shows some
pretty significant negative territory
for sentiment on the stock market right
now, despite the fact that the market's
at all-time highs. This is something
that it takes a lot of investors a long
time to understand. But markets climb a
wall of worry. It's when everybody
expects the market to continue to go up.
Everybody is greedy. everybody is
euphoric. That's when you want to be
afraid and that's when you want to start
maybe pairing down your positions or
hedging or putting in some stop- losses.
But when sentiment is really low, it
doesn't really matter that the market's
at all-time highs. Markets climb walls
of worry. Goldman Sachs pointed out
their sentiment indicator is so low
because of widespread concern about an
equity market bubble and that none of
the nine positioning measures in this
indicator are in stretched territory.
Goldman Sachs also pointed out that they
continue to highlight that institutional
investor positioning remains light. In
other words, despite the market being at
all-time highs and sitting on the back
of a massive bull run, institutional
allocation is still light because
they're afraid the market's in a bubble.
Sentiment is still in the dump. And
Chris Sadial, who is the co-CIO of
Ambress, they're a volatility fund,
confirms this, saying that they're a
good chunk of wealth advisor platforms
that have derisked their exposure since
April. Remember, April was when the
market was dumping, and they have not
gotten back to their normal levels of
equity exposure, which means in Q4 of
this year, a lot of these assets are
going to have to start making their way
back into equities, buying on any dips,
chasing equities higher to make up
ground for underperforming the
benchmark. This is something that most
people don't realize about the vast
majority of money management out there.
The standard operating procedure is that
it's better to be safe than sorry.
Instead of going out on a limb and
chasing better returns, taking on excess
risk that could wind up losing you
money, it's better to just fall a little
bit behind the curve. At least you're
going along with the crowd. That way
when somebody compares you to the
benchmark, yeah, you might be
underperforming a little bit, but at
least you're going down with everybody
else and up with everybody else, which
means most people are not going to pull
their assets from you because if they
put them somewhere else, they're going
to have similar performance anyway. As a
result, you get a lot of money managers
who end up just chasing trends, and the
market is sitting at all-time highs
after a big crash, and they're still not
positioned in equities the way they need
to be. Now, in another sign that people
are not overly invested in the stock
market right now, is the fact that
leverage is actually being taken off the
table. If you look at a fund like SOXL,
which is a triple leveraged ETF tied to
semiconductor stocks, you see that for
months now there have been massive
outflows and that's despite the fact
that this fund has been making
significant gains that entire time. Weak
institutional allocation and traders
taking leverage off the table are not
usually things you see at market tops.
They're things you see before giant
rallies. Now, by the way, if you're
interested in learning more about how to
use this situation to make money
yourself, I am going to cover some
standard practices at the end of this
video that anybody can apply to their
own portfolio. However, I am also about
to launch a new beta test for a service
where I'm going to be tracking a very
special type of trade. These are trades
that I believe could soar as this all
plays out over the coming months and
even years. And in the past when I've
run these beta tests, the people who did
join had the chance to take home some
pretty impressive returns. And so now
that I'm running a beta test part two,
I'd like to extend that invitation to
you. That's why on October 9th at 700
p.m. Eastern time, I'm going to be
hosting a live Zoom call to explain what
this is all about. We're going to cover
things like number one, details on a
specific category of assets in the
market that I believe is about to
explode over the coming months and
quarters. Number two, I'm going to cover
how I'm already using these assets to
generate double and tripledigit returns,
sometimes in a matter of months. And
finally, number three, I'm also going to
be giving away two free stock picks on
the call to anybody who shows up just
for joining. If you're interested in
seeing what this is all about, go ahead
and just click on the link in the
description below to sign up. Attendance
on the call is free, but my beta test
spots are limited. Okay. Now, I'd like
to point you to this chart, which is
another piece of evidence that we are
nowhere near the top in the market. This
is a table that shows every single time
the Federal Reserve has cut interest
rates while they've been near all-time
highs. And by near, I mean within 2% of
an all-time high. You can see they've
done this plenty of times all the way
since 1980 until now. And if you look at
the column all the way on the right, you
can see the returns over the following
12 months, 100% positive. So far, there
has never been a situation where the
Federal Reserve has cut rates near an
all-time high and the market has not
been higher one year later. Now,
obviously, if we look at shorter time
periods like 6 months, 3 months, or even
1 month, there are plenty of red numbers
on this table. Some standouts are when
the market plummeted by 20% in 1990
within 3 months following a rate cut at
all-time highs or in 2019 when the stock
market plummeted almost 20% when the Fed
cut near all-time highs. And that took
place over the next 6 months. But the
vast majority of the time, even 3 and 6
months later, the market is higher after
a rate cut near all-time highs. And
historically, the longest you'd have to
wait to have a gain would be 1 year. And
obviously, we just had another Fed rate
cut with the market at all-time highs.
Historically speaking, this would
indicate we've got room to the upside.
But it's not just institutional
positioning. It's not just deleveraging.
It's not just Fed rate cuts. We're also
seeing some of the most and fastest
buybacks for stocks that we've seen
ever. So far, stocks have bought back
more shares this year than they have for
the last 20 years. And by the end of the
year, stock buybacks are projected to
hit a new fullear record. One crazy
example of stock buybacks that I've been
watching for almost a decade now is
Apple. You can see this chart from
Creative Planning shows both the number
of buybacks that Apple is doing and the
number of shares that Apple has left in
the market. You can see for over a
decade now, Apple has been decreasing
the number of shares that are available
on the market as they've been ramping up
buybacks. So, one thing most people get
wrong about buybacks is they think that
it artificially inflates the stock
price. That could not be further from
the truth. It is simply a way to return
value from profits to shareholders. That
can be done through dividends. That can
be done through stock buybacks, but it
doesn't artificially or manipulate the
stock price because in order to do a
buyback, the company has to purchase
those shares. And so the share price
goes up, all else being equal, for the
exact same amount that their cash goes
down. It's the same thing like when you
get paid a dividend from a stock. If you
go watch the stock market on that date,
the stock will actually drop by the
exact amount of the dividend that they
paid. If a company does not produce
profits or revenues sufficient to buy
back shares, it cannot have anything to
return to shareholders through buybacks.
And in the case of Apple, it will be
very interesting to watch how this plays
out because at this pace of buybacks,
they could actually take themselves
private. They're on track to do so by
about 2035. So, companies overwhelmingly
deciding to return their value to their
shareholders by purchasing their own
shares instead of paying it out in
dividends. That value stays in the
market. That drives share prices higher.
Again, all else being equal, is another
indication of a lot more buying to come.
Now, if you're sitting there thinking,
"Man, I hate this. I want the stock
market to crash. It shouldn't be this
high. It's so expensive. Valuations are
crazy." I want you to recognize that
emotion in yourself because it's
probably a similar emotion that many
people have right now, which is a good
indication that we're not at a top.
Usually at tops, everybody is euphoric.
Everybody is greedy. Everybody is trying
to pile in as fast as they can because
they think it's easy money and they're
getting rich. And if that's not the
feeling you're having right now, there's
a good chance most other people are not
as well, which is a good indication
we're not at a top. Markets climb walls
of worry. But the other thing is you
always have to ask whenever somebody
says it's expensive, you have to ask
compared to what. This is a chart of the
S&P 500 going back many, many decades.
Obviously, it's at an all-time high, but
you can't just use that to say it's
expensive. Yes, it takes more dollars to
buy those stocks than it ever has
before. But what if the dollars
themselves are losing value? Now you
have to compare stocks to something
else. And if we compare the value of the
S&P 500 to the value of gold, in other
words, we're pricing stocks in gold
instead of dollars, you get a very
different picture. The blue line that
you're looking at here is the S&P 500
priced in gold. And you can see that
while it might look slightly elevated,
it is nowhere near incredibly expensive
territory. It's nowhere near where it
was at the top of the market in 2021.
It's nowhere near where it was obviously
at the peak of the dot bubble and it's
also nowhere near where it was right
before we delin from the gold standard.
But I have two other lines on here, a
pink one and a yellow one. And the
yellow line is the 200 month moving
average. You can see we are literally
right there at the 200-month moving
average and this pink line is the
500month moving average. We are just
below the 500month moving average. So
zooming out looking at the S&P 500
priced in gold for the last century or
so, you can see stocks are not extremely
overvalued. They're not expensive in
gold terms. Now, if you're still sitting
there thinking, "I just don't like to
invest at all-time highs. I've been
sitting in cash for six months. I've
been sitting in cash for a year, waiting
for a crash." I would like to ask you a
couple of things. What kind of a crash
are you waiting for? What price are you
looking for? Were you sitting in cash
through the April crash and you let it
come and go? If so, how do you know
you'll take advantage of the next crash?
How will you know when it has fallen far
enough for you to view it as stocks
being on sale? Most of the time, people
are very bad at this, which is why the
data shows stats like this. You see four
names here. I'm going to explain what
each one of these people did. These are
hypothetical imaginary people in a study
from Charles Schwab. But I want you to
notice that the investment performance
from Peter, Ashley, Matthew, and Rosie
are all pretty similar. Obviously, Rosie
did the worst of these four, but not
significantly worse. Larry, on the other
hand, did do significantly worse. So,
what were the choices that these five
hypothetical investors made? Again,
these were made through analyzing market
data, looking at historical market
performance, and assigning behavior and
decision-making characteristics to five
hypothetical people. So, they looked at
80 separate 20-year periods. And then
they created somebody called Peter who
always timed his investments perfectly.
These were annual investments and so of
the amount that he was going to invest
every single year, he did it at the
market bottom. He ended his 20-year
period with 186,000, which is why he
came out on top. Ashley, however, simply
put her money to work as soon as she
received it each year. In other words,
Ashley was not trying to time the market
at all whatsoever. Anytime she had cash
available, she just invested it. And you
can see that while she did underperform,
it was pretty close. Next, we have
Matthew, who decided to dollar cost
average, which meant that instead of
investing as soon as he had the cash
available, he would take his cash and
just slowly invest it in equal amounts
over the course of the year. Matthew
also underperformed a little bit more
and that simply comes down to the fact
that most of the time markets are going
up. There are certain periods where the
market goes down, but the vast majority
of the time markets are going up. So,
the vast majority of the time, dollar
cost averaging will have worse
performance than lumpsum investing if
you have the cash available. So, over
most 20-year periods, Matthew slightly
underperformed, but again, not that bad.
Next, we have Rosie, who tried to time
the market, but she timed it poorly. In
other words, she was trying to mimic
Peter, but she wasn't buying the
bottoms, she was buying the tops. and
that did lead her to underperform, but
still really not bad, especially
considering the last person, Larry, who
kept on waiting for a better opportunity
and never bought at all. What is the
takeaway from this? Depending on how you
measure the stock market, it's not
really expensive right now. But even if
you measure it in dollars and even if
you're looking at valuations and even if
you're looking at the economy and you're
saying, "We're at a market top.
Everything is about to crumble."
Statistically, you do better to act like
Rosie by being a poor timer of the
market than being Larry who thinks you
can time the market and just never
actually invests. Obviously, I am not
saying that you should just throw your
money in blindly to any asset just
because in the past it has gone up. I am
one of the biggest proponents of active
investing. I don't like the advice to
just dollar cost average into index
funds, bury your head in the sand, and
hope everything turns out okay. When
markets are up, when markets are frothy,
when volatility is low, when hedging is
cheap, I think you should hedge. I think
you should take profits off the table. I
think you should use basic risk
management tools like even trailing stop
orders. But most people are not going to
do any of that. Most people are either
going to be all in the market or they're
going to be in cash. And the people who
wait to try and time it so that they can
get those bottoms rarely ever do. And if
you want to be one of those individual
investors who just clobbers
institutions, this is what it looks
like. It means buying when things are
down, buying when things are going up,
not sitting on the sidelines hoping for
a bigger crash next time. And again, if
you'd like a special invitation to my
beta test, so you can see how I'm
playing this next leg up in the market,
the specific assets that I'm targeting
that look like they have the potential
to pay big profits for the coming
quarters and years. Don't forget to sign
up for my free Zoom call. It's October
9th, 700 p.m. Eastern time. Link is in
the description below. See you there.
Thanks so much for watching.