Inflation fell again last month, more
than expected, which means we're
probably going to see that money printer
fire up again soon. You can see this
chart of the CPI shows April
year-over-year inflation fell to
2.3%. That means prices in April 2025
were 2.3% higher than they were April of
2024. Now, this was a drop from a month
earlier in March where the CPI was at
2.4%.
Now you can see even though it's been
volatile for the last couple of years,
the CPI has been moving lower. Now some
economists were astonished by this
because they expected that the tariffs
would be pushing the CPI up higher. That
is not how tariffs work. When you
artificially make some things more
expensive with a tax, it just means that
people have less money overall to spend
everywhere else, which means tariffs
slow down the economy. Without a
broad-based increase in the overall
money supply, you would not be getting a
spike in prices. I don't know why this
is such a hard concept for mainstream
economists to grasp. So, why am I saying
that this is likely to allow the money
printer to fire up again soon? Well,
it's because the Federal Reserve by law
is mandated to care about three things:
employment, prices, and interest rates.
Now, the thing that makes their job
difficult is that they only have one
tool to manage all three of these, and
that is either money printing or money
destruction, injecting liquidity, or
withdrawing liquidity. When they're
printing money, it will help
unemployment, but it will hurt prices.
when they're destroying money or
withdrawing liquidity, it will help
prices, but it will hurt employment. And
so, the fact that inflation is
continuing to fall means that they don't
have to worry about the negative effects
of money printing pushing up prices. And
in the face of a softening labor market
with rising initial jobless claims, they
will have more freedom to lower interest
rates and quantitative tightening or
maybe even resume QE again. Now, I
mentioned before that they also care
about interest rates, and this is the
little known third mandate given to them
by Congress, which is that their job is
to moderate long-term interest rates.
Now, whether that means 10-year
treasuries, 20-year treasuries, or
30-year treasuries, that is left up to
interpretation. And whether that means
3%, 5%, 10%, or somewhere in between,
that is also left up to interpretation.
But it is a fact that it is their job to
maintain moderate long-term interest
rates. And that job has been given to
them by Congress the same way that they
are told that they have to care about
maximum employment and stable prices.
Now, earlier I talked about how
unemployment and inflation moved
opposite to each other when the Fed
decides to print money or withdraw money
from the system. So, how does that
impact interest rates? Well, it actually
depends on where we are in the long-term
US debt cycle. The last time the US
government was in a deleveraging phase
was from 1940 through 1980. During this
time, you can see interest rates rose
significantly. During this same time
period, the United States government's
debt compared to the size of the GDP
dropped from about 120% down to about
30%. During this time, the Federal
Reserve engaged in yield curve control
and other tools to help the US
government delever. This caused higher
inflation, higher interest rates for the
average person, but it allowed the
government to perform an inflationary
deleveraging. Now, the pendulum swung
back the opposite direction from around
1980 until 2020 with interest rates
dropping over time, allowing the
government to relever up. You can see
during that time, US debt to GDP rose
from about 30% all the way back up to
120%. Now we have entered the
deleveraging phase of the US debt cycle
yet again with interest rates rising,
inflation rising and the government's
debt to GDP ratio starting to fall. This
will be another inflationary
deleveraging where the US government
gets to borrow at rates lower than the
rate of inflation helped by the Federal
Reserve. This causes inflation for all
of us which pushes interest rates up for
all of us. Even though there are certain
periods of time you can see where
interest rates do fall, the overall
trend is higher. And the same will be
true here. Since everything bottomed in
2020, we have and we will continue to
see short-term periods of time where
rates will fall. The long-term trend
here is an inflationary deleveraging for
the US government. So if and when
interest rates do dip a little bit,
those are times to take advantage. Lock
in low rate debt for as long as you can.
aggressively buy assets that will be
lifted from all of this money printing,
from this inflationary deleveraging. But
understand that for many, many years,
potentially decades, we will not see the
same type of environment that many of us
are familiar with. In other words, this
40-year time period of falling interest
rates and falling inflation is done.
It's history. That 40-year bond bull
market is over. We are in a bond bare
market now. And increasingly, the
biggest buyer will be central banks like
the Fed. Like I said, this is going to
be very beneficial for asset prices,
which is one of the reasons why we've
already seen a new bull market emerge
from the bottom of the bare market as
investors start to price in that new
future reality. Now, if you'd like me to
help you apply ideas like this to your
own investing so that you can grow your
portfolio and protect it during times of
crisis, click on the link in the
description below. As always, thanks so
much for watching. Have a great day.