A new plan has just been proposed that
would eliminate the Federal Reserve's
ability to pay interest to banks on
reserves held at the Fed. And according
to the pitch deck, this would save the
US government $1.1 trillion
over 10 years. Now, if that sounds
completely crazy, we have to get into
the backstory a little bit here. And
hang with me because it will get a
little technical, but I promise I'll
break it down simply at the end. This is
a chart of reserves held by financial
institutions at the Federal Reserve. In
other words, the Fed is kind of like a
bank for other banks. So, when you're
looking at a chart of reserves, it's
kind of like you're just looking at the
sum total of all of the accounts that
banks have at the Fed. Right now,
there's about $3.3 trillion in reserves
held at the Fed. Now, when you hear
about the Federal Reserve making a
decision to lower or raise interest
rates, they are not making decisions
about raising or lowering mortgage
rates, credit card rates, auto loan
rates, even treasury rates. The only
interest rate they are talking about is
called the Fed funds rate. And that is
the interest rate that they pay to banks
on those reserves held at the Fed. Okay.
So, quick note of clarification for
anybody who cares about nuance and
complete accuracy over just generalized
understanding. Technically, the federal
funds rate is not the interest rate that
the Fed pays to banks on their reserves
held at the Fed. Technically, that is
called the IORB or the interest on
overnight reserve balances. Now, the
federal funds rate is the range that the
Fed wants banks to pay each other on the
cash that they lend to each other
overnight. The Fed uses the IRB to pay
interest on reserves at the Fed in order
to make sure that the federal funds
effective rate stays in between the
federal funds range that it wants it to
stay in. How does this change anything
we're talking about today? It doesn't
change it at all. But I know there are
some of you who technically know there's
a difference and I wanted to make the
clarification for anybody who cares. But
because the Fed uses the IRB in order to
maintain the effective rate on the FFR
between its preferred range, the rates
are going to be usually pretty close to
identical. Okay, now back to our
scheduled programming. This is a chart
of what the federal funds interest rate
is and right now it's at 4.33%.
Technically, the Fed funds rate is a
range. This chart that you're looking at
here is the current effective rate. So,
at this point, you're probably
wondering, well, why in the world would
stopping the Fed from paying interest on
these reserves have anything to do with
saving the US government money? Well,
take a look at this chart again because
you've probably noticed something
interesting, which is that prior to
2008, banks really didn't hold any
reserves at the Fed at all. The amount
of reserves held at the Fed was pretty
consistent in between 20 to $60 billion.
But then suddenly it exploded to a
trillion and then $2 trillion by 2013
and then $3 trillion by 2020 and
currently sitting at 3.3 trillion. And
the reason why banks really didn't hold
any reserves at the Fed until that point
is because payments of interest on
reserves only started in 2008 during the
financial crisis. Total interest
payments started out around $1 billion
and as of today those interest payments
have climbed to approximately $186
billion. Now the reason why the Federal
Reserve started to do this is basically
to make sure that interest rates didn't
go negative. This is a chart of the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet, and you
can see they started purchasing a ton of
US treasuries and mortgage back
securities around the same time in 2008.
They've continued to do that ever since,
ballooning their balance sheet to a top
of almost $9 trillion, and it's sitting
now at about $6.6 trillion. When the
Federal Reserve buys assets from the
financial markets, they're taking newly
created dollars and replacing those
assets with those newly created dollars.
Which means that those financial
institutions that sold those assets to
the Fed now no longer have an asset, but
they do have cash that they have to go
out there and do something with. During
times of increased government borrowing
and spending, this feedback loop can
push interest rates very close to
negative territory. You can see in the
fallout of the financial crisis,
interest rates approached 0%. And you
can see again after 2020 and in early
2021, interest rates approached 0% yet
again. And this is because financial
institutions just have all this fresh
cash. They've got to do something with
it. So, they're going to go out there
and they're going to buy something that
produces interest for them. But all that
buying pressure drives the price up to
the point where yields get so low
they're verging on going negative. In
order to prevent that from happening,
the Federal Reserve says, "Hey, don't
take your cash and go out into the
marketplace and buy things like tea
bills. Instead, park that cash with us
at the Fed and we will pay you an
interest rate instead." That way, you're
not going out there as a bank buying up
assets and driving up those prices and
potentially making interest rates go
negative, breaking global financial
markets. And so, the interest rate that
the Federal Reserve pays on reserves has
been a tool to keep a floor underneath
interest rates. Because if I'm a
financial institution and I've got a
billion dollars to deploy, do I want to
buy some corporate debt that has a high
chance of default? Or do I want to take
on less risk and buy US treasuries which
have almost no risk of default even
though there is still some? Or I can
take that cash and I can park it at the
Federal Reserve in my bank account at
the Fed and I can get the exact same
interest rate actually risk-f free. Of
course, I'm going to do that all day
long. which is why there's $3.3 trillion
in reserves currently sitting at the Fed
because it's basically a risk-free
savings account for banks and they can
get paid that interest rate with zero
risk of default and that keeps a floor
underneath interest rates because I'm
not going to lend money to the US
government with a tiny risk of default
unless I can get a better interest rate
than what I could get if I give that
money to the Fed. And so this recent
proposal to eliminate the Fed's ability
to pay interest on reserves would likely
take reserves held at the Fed very close
to where it was prior to the financial
crisis, basically zero. Which means
you've got $3.5 trillion or close to it
that will suddenly need a place to go in
order to get interest. And where is all
that money going to go? Well, it's going
to go to the next place that is almost
risk-free, which is tea bills. In other
words, short-term US government treasury
bonds. Now, supply and demand, more
money coming in to buy up T bills means
those prices go up, yields go down. It
makes borrowing for the US government
temporarily easier. It also means that
when interest rates go down and the
government borrows that money at a lower
interest rate because there's all that
fresh cash that wants to be lent to it,
it means that the US government's
interest payments temporarily go down,
which means that the deficit temporarily
goes down. But that's not all. Right
now, the Federal Reserve is printing
money to pay that interest to banks. But
if you remember, the Federal Reserve has
a balance sheet and holds 6.6 trillion
worth of assets. Those are assets like
treasuries and mortgage back securities
that actually pay interest to the Fed.
So, the Fed has a portfolio of assets
that pay it interest. And that interest
on $6.6 6 trillion worth of assets is
not enough to cover all the Fed's
expenses right now, which means they're
printing money to pay interest on all
those reserves to the banks. But if the
Federal Reserve can no longer pay
interest on reserves and subsequently
reserves go down close to zero, then the
Federal Reserve's bills essentially drop
by a huge amount, which means that the
Federal Reserve will likely be
profitable again. In other words, all of
the interest that is getting paid back
to the Fed from the assets that are on
the Fed's balance sheet will be more
than all the Fed's expenses again. And
what does the Federal Reserve do with
its profits that are in excess of its
expenses? It pays those profits back to
the US government, back to the Treasury.
Okay. Now, to break it down simply,
right now you have a bank who has all
this excess cash and it doesn't want to
take any risk with it. So, it parks that
in its savings account with the Fed. The
Fed currently makes income from
taxpayers as we pay the US government
from our paychecks in order to service
the debt. A lot of that is held by the
Federal Reserve. So those interest
payments are getting paid to the Fed.
And that's not enough for the Federal
Reserve to make all of its payments to
those banks that are holding their cash
at the Fed. So the Fed prints up extra
money in order to pay those banks the
interest on those reserves. So this
proposal says the Fed should no longer
be able to pay interest on those
reserves. That will mean that $3.3
trillion will leave the Fed and instead
turn around to the US government and be
lent to the US government directly. This
will drive down interest rates for the
government temporarily as there will be
more demand for US government debt. This
will make interest payments temporarily
cheaper. This will make the deficit
temporarily smaller and make the debt
accumulation temporarily a little
slower. But it also means that the
Federal Reserve will have a huge expense
wiped off from what it has to pay. which
means that all the income it produces
from the interest that it gets paid on
US government debt that again taxpayers
are paying for, a lot of that will be
able to get swept right back to the US
Treasury in the form of excess profits
sent back to the government. And that's
why they estimate that this will save
approximately $1.1 trillion over the
next 10 years. So what are the downsides
of this? Well, number one, it means that
banks will have to take on a little bit
extra risk by loaning to the government
by buying T bills instead of parking it
completely risk-f free at the Fed.
Boohoo, right? Well, there's a second
risk, a second downside. Second downside
is that this is not going to stop
government spending. This is not going
to stop government borrowing. This is
not going to stop the debt accumulation.
This is not going to stop crazy
spending. This is just going to make it
temporarily less painful, which means
the government's probably just going to
do more of it. And every dollar the
government spends comes out of your
pocket. Whether it comes out of your
paycheck in taxes or whether it comes
out of your paycheck in the form of
goods being more expensive to buy. You
don't fix a drug addict's addiction to
drugs by giving them more and cheaper
drugs. You don't fix a debt addict's
addiction to debt and spending by giving
them more access to cheaper debt. And
you don't fix the government spending
problem by giving them more access to
spending power. So, is this a pretty big
band-aid if this actually happens? Yes.
But it is a band-aid nonetheless. We're
in a new phase of the debt cycle. The
falling rates and the disinflation from
1980 to 2020 are done. We are seeing
more volatility and flash crashes in the
market today than we have in the last h
100red years. This is all a result of
markets adjusting to the new normal. You
need to take advantage of this. Also
protect yourself against inflation and
be exposed to the meltups and asset
prices that happen along the way. If you
don't know how to do this, I've created
the perfect guide for you. It's called
the hedged hyperrowth portfolio
blueprint. I've got it linked for you
down below. It's the cheapest it'll ever
be. I am going to double the price very
soon, so get it before that happens. As
always, thank you so much for watching.