We just got deflation for the first time
since 2020. And yes, I mean deflation,
not disinflation. And this is also going
to have an impact on your portfolio.
This chart right here is a chart of
month overmonth price changes. So
anytime you have one of these blue bars
above the zero line with a positive
number, that's how much prices changed
on average from one month to the next.
For instance, in January of this year,
prices increased a half a percent from
the month prior. You can see the last
time this number was negative was in
2020. March of 2020, prices fell a half
a percent from February to March. And
then April of 2020, prices
fell8% from March to April. And then May
of 2020, prices fell.1% from April to
May of 2020. Since then, we have had a
few months where the CPI registered zero
change in prices. But March of 2025 was
the first month where we have had price
decreases. This is different than
disinflation. Disinflation is prices
still going up, but they're just going
up at a slower pace. That almost be like
if you're driving a car and you hit the
brakes. You would be slowing down, but
you're still moving forward. This would
be like throwing the car in reverse and
backing up a little bit. So right now
from February to March of 2025 on
average prices actually went down. Now
obviously prices going down.1% is not
really meaningful especially considering
the fact that things that people still
care about buying are increasing in
prices like eggs. So why is this a big
deal? Well, inflation numbers are one of
the most important things that the
Federal Reserve pays attention to when
determining interest rates. When
combating the inflation they unleashed
from the trillions in printing in 2020,
they raised rates extremely quickly and
then held them steady through basically
half of 2023 and all of 2024. Towards
the end of 24, they did start to lower
rates. But because that caused a
resurgence in inflation, and it caused
interest rates on longerterm bonds to
actually go up in response to that
expected inflation, they decided to stop
lowering rates and hold steady for most
of 2025. Now, year-over-year inflation
is still positive. When you measure
prices from March of 2024 until March of
2025, prices did still increase about
2.4%. But interestingly, that's the
exact same place that the CPI was at in
September of 2024, which is right when
the Federal Reserve started cutting
rates last time. Again, the CPI is one
of the main things the Fed pays
attention to when determining what to do
with interest rates. And with
year-over-year inflation back into a
zone that they like and looking like
it's headed lower and month- over-month
inflation actually negative for the
first time since 2020. This means that
the Federal Reserve does not have the
excuse that they've had for at least the
last couple of months to hold interest
rates steady. Especially if you start
seeing problems appear in the job
market. If you see problems appear in
the stock market. If you see problems
appear in the bond market. If you see
numbers going the wrong way with GDP.
any of these potential catalysts, people
could be looking at the Fed and saying,
"Hey, you should be lowering interest
rates." And with the inflation numbers
looking the way they're looking right
now, they will not have the excuse to
say, "We can't lower rates because
inflation is just too high." Now, we're
already starting to see cracks appear in
the bond market. I made a video about
this already. Go back and watch it if
you haven't. But the 10-year US Treasury
yield has been skyrocketing recently
because of liquidity problems, an unwind
in the basis trade, and hedge funds
getting liquidated. This lack of
liquidity would be solved by the Federal
Reserve lowering the Federal Funds rate.
We've also very obviously been seeing
cracks appear in the stock market with
wild swings in stock market prices that
rival some of the biggest crashes in
history, like the Great Depression. And
the Federal Reserve lowering interest
rates here would be very bullish for
asset prices. If we go back in time a
bit to 2018, the stock market was
crashing towards the end of 2018 when
the Federal Reserve was tightening.
President Trump put a ton of pressure on
the Fed and because the inflation
numbers weren't there, they didn't have
any excuse to keep on tightening. They
reversed course, started easing, and
that sent the stock market soaring
again. You can see here the federal
funds rate right at the end of 2018 was
when they stopped raising interest
rates. And so with all of the risks
popping up everywhere in the stock
market, the bond market, the real estate
market, trade war, GDP, and now the main
reason the Fed tightens suddenly
starting to turn around, it seems like
it is only a matter of time before the
Federal Reserve starts easing again,
lowering interest rates, which would be
very bullish for risk assets like
stocks. Stock market is already down
more than 20% from top to bottom, which
means this is a bare market, and bare
markets do not happen very often. And
when they do, if you don't take
advantage of them by buying the best
stocks in the world at discounted
prices, you end up kicking yourself for
years to come, hoping that you catch the
next draw down. Don't let that be you.
And if you don't know what to buy and
don't know when to buy it, I've created
the perfect bare market investing guide
for you. Gives you everything you need
to know about how to build your fortune
during this bare market. I've got it on
a crazy discount for right now only
until the bare market is over. So, don't
wait until it's too late. Linked in the
description below. As always, thank you
so much for watching. Have a great day.