Have you ever lost a lot of money? And I
mean lost so much that you can't sleep
at night. Lost so much money that you
have a knot, a pit in the bottom of your
stomach for days, weeks, or even months?
Lost so much that you can't stop
replaying it in your mind, wondering why
you didn't sell sooner or buy later or
do something different. You find
yourself daydreaming about what if there
was a way to go back in time and make
different choices. and the dread, the
nagging feeling in the back of your mind
that won't go away, wondering if you'll
ever be able to recover. If that
description gives you PTSD, you know the
feeling. I know it, too. And let me tell
you, the only thing worse than having a
big loss like that is not learning the
right lesson from it and having another
big loss later. Now, the best thing is
obviously learning the right lessons
from somebody else who took those losses
so that you can learn it without
experiencing it yourself. That's why
today I'm going to share with you the
three largest losses I've ever had and
the proper lessons to take away from
them so that you never have to go
through it yourself. Each of these
losses got progressively bigger for me
in terms of dollar amount, but smaller
for me in terms of percentage of my net
worth. If you don't know me, my name is
Joe Brown. I was a stock broker for
years before I left that went out on my
own to start Heresy Financial where I
make videos for you teaching you about
how to make more money. And I also have
a private group where I publish
investment research and trade ideas. My
first big loss happened when I just
began being a trader and I started
trading options. Now, if you know
anything about options, you know that
there are very safe and conservative
strategies that you can do with options.
And there are some very dangerous ones
that can land you in a lot of hot water.
And I was getting pretty close to those
more dangerous strategies. At the time,
I was making just about $40,000 a year,
but I was making way more money trading
options than I was from my salary. I had
people warn me, "Hey, what you're doing
is risky." But I thought I was smarter
than everybody else. I thought that they
just didn't know how to do it. And for
the ones who did know how to do it that
I knew I wasn't smarter than, I just
thought, well, I've got bigger, let's
say, more guts than them. Now, this went
on for just a couple of months, which is
enough time to start to feel invincible.
I was participating in trades that were
almost guaranteed to win. Now, if you
know anything about investments and
trades, if there is something that is
virtually guaranteed to make money, the
amount of money you can make on it is
pretty small. Which means in order for
me to make any significant amount of
money, I had to load up on the
contracts. In other words, the leverage.
This meant that in the rare case that
something would go wrong that I would
lose a lot of money. But I'd done the
math. I'd run the numbers. I'd looked at
the odds. only a one in 100year,
potentially one ina,000year event could
cause me to lose money. And sure enough,
that's exactly what happened. Basically,
overnight, I lost about $25,000, which
might not sound like a lot, but to me at
the time, it was about 90% of my net
worth. And when you're making only
$40,000 with a wife and new baby at
home, you're not exactly just a few
months away from saving up to that
amount again. So, what are the takeaways
and the lessons from this that I was
able to apply so that I never run into a
situation like this again and that you
can take yourself? Number one, you're
not smarter than everybody else. In
fact, there's a great book called When
Genius Failed by Roger Loenstein. And
it's a book about pretty much the
smartest people in the world who
basically started a fund doing a very
similar in structure strategy to what I
was doing. In other words, very small
bets, very likely to pay off. load up on
a bunch of leverage for virtually
guaranteed money. Something unexpected
happens, you blow up. If you think
you're the smartest person in the world,
that's a red flag that you're probably
doing something very dangerous. Every
other trader and investor in the world
with a lot more resources than you have
is trying to take everything from you.
You can never know the odds. You can
only know the risk. And so do not define
risk as volatility or a probability.
Risk is what is the worstc case
scenario. That's the only thing you can
actually know. And if you trade and
invest in a way to protect yourself
against whatever the worst case scenario
is, then you are much more likely to
succeed in building a lot of wealth over
your career. This is why the best
investors and traders throughout history
all have the same number one rule, which
is don't lose money. You have to manage
your risk. You have to make sure that
the worst case scenario can't happen to
you or if it does, it's not actually
going to ruin you. Which means that the
proper way to trade is basically the
opposite of what I was doing there,
where you need to be making investments
and trades that maybe have a lower
probability or likelihood of paying off,
but if they do, they make you a lot of
money. And if they don't pay off, they
only lose you a little. And by the way,
if you're sitting there thinking, I have
no idea how to do that, you're in luck.
On Sunday, this coming Sunday, August
17th, at 7:00 p.m. Eastern time, I'm
hosting a free live Zoom call to teach
you exactly how to do this. Especially
with everything going on in the world
right now, from macroeconomics to
geopolitics to the Federal Reserve,
monetary policy, fiscal policy, debt
spiral, everything like that. We are
entering into a period of time where
trading the correct way will allow you
to profit no matter what the market
does, whether it melts up, melts down,
or just is volatile in between. I've
used this strategy myself in virtually
every market environment there is to
take home some massive returns over the
past year and a half. Returns as high as
297%
733% and even 1,354%
on a single trade in as little as 9
months. These are trades with very small
limited downside where if they don't
work out, it's not going to ruin you. In
fact, it will barely make a dent on your
portfolio if you do it right. But when
they do pan out, they can be extremely
beneficial. If you're interested in
understanding how this works and
learning what asymmetric trades I'm
looking at right now, click the link in
the description below to sign up for my
event. Again, it's coming up this
Sunday, August 17th, 700 p.m. Eastern
time. This is a completely free call. It
is live and the spots are limited. So,
don't wait to sign up. I'll see you
there. Okay. So, the next large amount
of money that I lost this time ramped up
to $100,000.
This was a private investment that I
made in a gold miner.
And if any of you have ever invested in
minors, then uh you know why that made
me laugh. Now in this particular
situation, it was a private investment
and it was only open for a few investors
and it was closing very very soon.
Looking at the numbers, the amount that
we were investing, the current share
price, and the plan for what the
business was going to do going forward,
it looked to me like an opportunity that
could take my $100,000 and potentially
turn it into a million, 10 million, or
even more. The problem was the
opportunity was closing very quickly. I
had to scramble sell a bunch of things
that I didn't really want to sell to
free up the liquidity to make this
investment before the deadline. The
whole thing took place over the course
of about 2 to 3 days. And as soon as the
investment was locked in, management
went dark, went quiet, and everything
that we had planned on and everything
that I had heard of before in terms of a
plan started to evaporate. that pit in
your stomach, that nagging feeling in
the back of your head started to creep
up and I wondered, did I just get
scammed? And the answer to that question
was yes. I lost $100,000 on that
investment. And here are the things that
would have prevented me from getting
into that situation that hopefully
prevent you from having the same thing.
Number one, if it sounds too good to be
true, it probably is. There are very few
easy money investments, especially ones
that are available to regular everyday
people. If this was such a slam dunk, it
probably would have already been
invested in by much larger investors
than me. And the key thing here was that
I had a fear of missing out. The
deadline was just a couple of days away,
so I didn't have time to do my due
diligence. Never ever make any
investment decision if your main emotion
is fear of missing out. Now, be real
about this because everybody experiences
this thought or this emotion at some
point in their investing journey.
probably many times the fear that this
is the last opportunity or the only
opportunity to make this much of a
profit. Here's the reality though.
There's always another opportunity.
That's how markets work. That's how
they've worked since the beginning of
time. And that's how they will work
until humanity no longer exists. There's
always going to be an opportunity to
make money. Whether on the long side or
the short side, opportunities will never
go away, which means you never have to
feel the fear of missing out. You missed
the market crash in 2020. Don't worry
about it. There's going to be another
one. There was another one in 2022.
There will be another one in the future.
Whatever the thing is that you are
afraid of missing out on, you're not
going to miss out. That fear will only
drive you to make a choice or a decision
that is illinformed. And if you don't
have the opportunity to do the due
diligence and do the research to make
sure that it's a quality investment,
stay away. Now, don't get me wrong. I'm
not telling you that you need to be
certain. Certainty doesn't exist in
markets either. There's a great story in
the book, The Richest Man in Babylon,
which by the way, best beginner book for
understanding money and investing, but
there's a story in there about a man at
night who encounters another man who
wants to sell him his herd of sheep
because the other man needs some money
really quick. He can hear the sheep and
he can kind of get a sense of, hey,
there's probably a lot of sheep here and
it's nighttime, so the other man is
willing to take a big discount because
he needs the money fast. But the one man
just lolly gags and he tries to figure
out, oh, am I, you know, am I just
getting, you know, scammed here? Are
there actually this many sheep? What if
I pay this guy what sounds like a
discount and it turns out that I'm
actually buying a far fewer sheep than I
think? And he delays until sunlight.
Well, once the sun is up, everybody can
see how many sheep there are, and he's
able to get full price for his herd. So,
the guy misses out on the opportunity.
By the time certainty exists in any
opportunity, that means the profit
opportunity is gone. I'm not telling you
to look for certainty, but that fear of
any potential loss is equally as
powerful as the fear of missing out. And
there is no investment without risk.
Like I said earlier, all you can do is
figure out what is the worst case
scenario and is that going to ruin me or
is that going to be okay if that
happens. So never make an investment
decision based on fear. Always do your
due diligence and if you don't have
enough time to do the research, there's
going to be another opportunity in the
future. All right, last and biggest loss
that I've ever had was when I lost a
million. Now, this one, to be fair, it
was a loss of a million dollars of
profit. In other words, I made a trade
and just the gains on that trade at one
point was about 1.6 1.5 million. Now, at
the time when I was sitting on an
unrealized gain on this one trade of a
little over $1.5 million, I knew I
should sell. In fact, for about a week,
a week and a half, multiple times a day,
I would go in and I would mock up a
trade to I was got I was on the edge. I
was ready to click the button to sell.
But like I said, this was close to the
end of the year. And in my mind, I was
thinking, if I sell now, I'm going to
have this much more capital gains for
the end of this year. I'm going to have
to pay taxes on it by, you know, this
month. What I want to do is just wait
six more weeks until the year turns
over. That way, this gain will be next
year and I won't have to worry about
paying taxes on this amount until
another year has passed. I know if
you're sitting there thinking, "Well,
that's the stupidest reason to not
sell."
You're right. It is. But I held I waited
on it. And over the next six weeks until
the turn of the year, I watched that 1.5
$1.6 million gain shrink down to about a
500 a little over a $500,000 gain. So, I
did sell once the year turned over and I
still walked away with a really good
gain on the trade over $500,000. But in
investing and trading, it's just mental
accounting to separate like realized
gains and losses from unrealized gains
and losses. They still actually
happened. In other words, if I had taken
the gain near the top and I had rolled
that over into a completely new
investment and then that new investment
had lost me a million dollars, we would
look at that and say, "Okay, yeah, you
actually had a million dollar loss." But
it's the same way cuz the net result is
that there was over a million dollars in
gains that evaporated. Now, if you're
sitting there thinking, "Well, man, what
in the world is the lesson from this?"
It's like, how could you have known that
it wasn't going to continue to go up?
That it wasn't going to uh, you know,
that it was going to crash, it wasn't
just going to stay the same. What
possibly could you have learned from
this to avoid this in the future? And
the answer is never make an investment
decision based off of taxes alone ever.
Every time you let the tax tail wag the
investment dog, you will end up with
less money than you would have otherwise
if you had just done the thing to make
the money, pay the taxes, and then keep
on focusing on doing the things to make
money every time. Now, I have other
stories as well about things that I have
done focused exclusively and solely on
saving money on taxes that in
retrospect, counting up the hours, the
time, the amount of money spent, all of
that, I would have done better off if I
would have just ignored the thing to
save the money on taxes and just focused
on making money instead. And this is the
largest example of that. Never make a
decision based solely on the tax
considerations alone. Taxes are the
cherry on top of the ice cream sundae.
You don't want a whole bucket or a bowl
just of the cherries. Now, to be clear,
I am not saying that you shouldn't
consider taxes at all. You absolutely
should. I am one of the largest
proponents of making sure the government
has as little of my money and your money
as possible. They don't deserve it. It's
not theirs. They don't own it. They
don't do anything good with it. It
doesn't belong to them, and they don't
have any right to it. But if you don't
give them what they want, then they put
you in jail. And so, I am one of the
biggest fans of making sure that legally
they get as little as possible. However,
when that becomes the sole focus, you
end up in a much worse financial
position than you would be if you
focused first and mainly on just making
money. And if I had sold any of those
times when I knew I should sell, I just
don't want to pay the taxes yet, then I
would have ended up much better off even
after paying the taxes. And even larger
than taxes here, the lesson is to
control the controllables. It's easy to
get distracted and focus on the things
that are outside of our control. even
things like monetary policy and fiscal
policy. Those are very helpful to
understand because those can help us
make better investment decisions. But if
we focus on them too much, it can drive
us to think, well, man, this should be
happening and I'm at a disadvantage
because it's not happening the way that
it should. Ignore it. Control the
controllables. Focus on what we can
change. Focus on what you can control.
managing your risk, doing your research,
checking your emotions, and making
financial decisions based off of the
only financial metric that matters,
maximizing total long-term wealth.
Anything else will land you with worse
returns. So, that's what I learned
losing a million dollars. And I hope
that it helps you and that you take
these lessons and run with them because
if you prioritize the things that I've
talked about in this video, it will
prevent you from having large losses,
which will only help you build wealth
faster and more securely over the long
term. And on top of making sure you
don't have large losses, if you are also
interested in learning how to trade for
big wins, again, I'm holding a free live
Zoom class called my asymmetric trading
master class coming up this Sunday,
August 17th, 700 p.m. Eastern time.
Don't miss it. Sign up now with the link
in the description below. As always,
thanks so much for watching. Have a
great time.