You might be getting a giant tax cut in
the year of 2025, but you may not be
prepared for how much it will cost.
Details from President Trump's one big
beautiful bill of tax cuts have now been
revealed, showing that they would add
$3.7 trillion to the national deficit.
Yes, that is adding almost $4 trillion
to the
deficit, not the debt, the deficit. For
context, last year in 2024, the US
government spent just under $7 trillion
in total spending. However, the US
government only took just under $5
trillion in total taxes. The difference
between what the government takes in
taxes and what it spends is called the
deficit. And that difference needs to be
made up through borrowing. And the
recently proposed tax cuts could add up
to $4 trillion to that deficit. In other
words, the amount that the US government
takes in taxes would shrink drastically.
And although this does incorporate a few
ways to try and pay for some of those
tax cuts, it's not even close to the
entire bill, which means total spending
is not going to drop significantly and
likely will actually even rise. Now, if
you were in the same position as the US
government here, this would be like you
having no savings, your income dropping
in half, and you deciding to increase
your spending. The only way that's going
to be possible is through borrowing, not
a smart long-term financial plan. Now,
don't get me wrong, I am all for the US
government taking less of my money. It
belongs to me. I'm going to do better
things with it than they will. And that
is true of everybody else out there. You
will be better off if you get to keep
more of your paycheck and you get to
invest it and you get to save more and
you get to pay down some more debt and
you get to spend it on better food,
better health care, and your community
will be better. Everywhere you spend
that money will be extra income that
it'll just be better all around. But you
also have to take a look at the other
side of the coin because the United
States government doesn't make
purchasing power out of thin air. It can
make dollars out of thin air through
borrowing, but that's not the same as
purchasing power. In other words,
there's no such thing as a free lunch.
Now, if you want to get access to more
of my heretical ideas just like this
one, sign up for my free newsletter with
the link in the description below. In
it, we discuss things like economics,
geopolitics, and even what I consider to
be some of the most dangerous ideas in
America. Plus, I'll give you a few
strategies for profiting from the chaos
and weathering any storm. Like I said,
it's completely free. The link is in the
description below. Hope to see you
inside. Anytime the US government spends
a single dollar, that dollar of
purchasing power came from somewhere. If
they spent a dollar that they took from
taxes, then that dollar came from your
paycheck. If they spent a dollar that
came from a direct loan, let's say you
bought a Treasury bond and you decided
to loan money to the US government, then
again, that $1 spent came as a direct
transfer from you who loaned it to them.
But the one thing that confuses the most
people is when neither of those things
happens and the government spends money
anyway. This is when the US government
borrows money into existence that didn't
exist before. Now, don't get me wrong,
this is not a free lunch. This is still
a transfer of purchasing power, but this
is the most deceptive because it
transfers purchasing power from the
entire pool of dollars to the new money
that was just created. You can think of
this kind of like a stock split just of
dollars instead of shares. You can think
of this like dilution of purchasing
power. You can think of this like a
pizza that goes from eight slices to 16
slices. It's still the same amount of
pizza, but there's more slices. Each one
is just smaller. And so if we really
want a better quality of life, a richer
economy, less poverty, more wealth, more
abundance, and less scarcity, we don't
just need the government to take less
money from taxes. We need them to spend
less money overall. Now, if you take a
look at interest rates on US government
debt, you can see the longer term trend
over the last couple of years is higher.
And we can see that that is even true
since the inauguration at the beginning
of 2025. And it looks like interest
rates are about to break out to the
upside. This makes sense if you expect
that the US government is going to
drastically shrink the amount of money
it takes from taxes. It's going to have
to make all that up through a lot of
extra borrowing. That borrowing is going
to be more expensive. Why? Well, because
as the US government borrows that money
into existence, they spend it into the
economy and it bids up the prices of
assets, goods, and services. In other
words, we get inflation. And lenders
want to be compensated for the loss of
purchasing power they have while that
loan exists before they get paid back.
Which means that the US government is
going to have to borrow to fund a much
larger deficit and growing debt pile,
interest rates will have to go up to
compensate. This also means that
quantitative easing will come back in
one of a few forms. Either the Federal
Reserve will outright just return to
quantitative easing or we will see some
sort of deregulation among banks so that
banks can take on that role without the
Fed. I think we are slightly more likely
to see the latter just because we would
need some sort of a financial emergency
or catalyst for the Federal Reserve to
give an excuse to step back into
quantitative easing. wouldn't do it just
from the yields on the 10-year rising
uncomfortably high. Now, it is true
lowering taxes, keeping spending high,
borrowing the difference will be good
for asset prices. Money printing pushes
asset prices up first, then it works its
way into the economy, bidding up the
price of goods and services, and then
the final destination is pushing up the
prices of wages. Which means that if you
know this is coming, which I've been
warning that this has been coming for
years now, that it doesn't matter who is
in power, this is what was going to
happen. Either way, then you can protect
yourself. You can buy assets, gold,
Bitcoin, stocks, real estate. Now, if
you're poor or you're not paying
attention, then the small drop you'll
get in the amount of taxes that you are
going to pay is probably not going to
make up for the fact that your wages
will not rise until after your cost of
living rises, which means this is
unlikely to result in the widespread
prosperity that's been promised. Now, at
the end of the day, we can't change
anything about what they decide to do.
We can only look at what is actually
going on and then act accordingly to
protect ourselves and to profit. Now, if
you'd like me to help you apply ideas
like this to your investing, click on
the link in the description below. As
always, thank you so much for watching.