Everyone seems to think that the dollar
is going to collapse in one single
catastrophic event. But that's not how
this story ends. The death of the dollar
looks more like controlled demolition,
flight to safety, and an irresistible
pull like the gravity from a black hole
that keeps demand for dollars growing.
It's starting now, and the world is
signaling a shift. And while the dollar
is inevitably going to lose its throne,
it's not happening in the way most
people expect. The signals about what is
actually happening are everywhere. And
if you're paying attention, you can see
it, too. First up, we're looking at a
chart of the dollar index, the DXY. This
value is calculated by looking at the
value of the dollar compared to a basket
of other currencies around the globe.
This chart goes back to 2008. And you
can see since the financial crisis, the
dollar has been getting gradually and
with volatility along the way more and
more valuable compared to other
currencies around the world. From 2007
to 2014, we can see the dollar index was
rangebound between the 75 to 90 level.
When it finally broke out, it got locked
into a new trading range in between 90
and 100. And that lasted from 2014
through 2022. And when it finally broke
out again, it broke out into the range
we see now in between 100 and 110. If we
zoom in recently, you can see that the
dollar index has declined substantially
since the start of 2025 or in other
words, the inauguration. This shortterm
drop in the value of the dollar relative
to other currencies is happening as a
result of the dollar being less valuable
to other currencies because of tariffs.
Tariffs very simply make it more
expensive for a nation to purchase
things from other nations. It makes that
currency less valuable. Now, the second
part of this is that if you can make
dollars less desirable to hold on to by
foreigners, then some of those dollars
can make their way back into the United
States, which will prop up asset prices.
But the big piece that we're seeing
right now is a flight to safety. If you
look at the price of gold, you are
seeing a signal that capital around the
world is flooding into safety. And as
you can see from this chart here, gold
as a percent of global international
reserves have been growing for years
now. While foreign holdings of
treasuries as a percent of government
debt has been declining. This doesn't
mean that foreign buyers of US
treasuries are completely gone. It
doesn't mean that there is no foreign
demand. But it does mean that as a
percentage of assets held, treasuries
are less and less attractive and gold is
becoming more and more attractive. In
other words, it's out with the old, in
with the gold. And this is the first
important note about what ddollization
actually looks like. It is a slow and
controlled reduction in exposure to the
reserve aspect of gold, which is
treasuries. This is not something that
happens overnight because if you tried,
you'd just kill yourself. So, large
foreign entities are slowly but surely
reducing their exposure to US government
debt. And we can see this in the rise of
interest rates as foreign buyers of US
government debt leave the market. Demand
is dropping, which means rates are
rising. But there is that old pesky
issue that I mentioned before that keeps
demand for dollars around with a force
that acts as strong as a black holes
gravity. And that is dollar denominated
debt. And it is a $100 trillion force.
And it will not go down easily, nor will
it be a smooth ride. There will be
incredible volatility as a result of
this $100 trillion bomb. Now, if you're
worried about some of the uncertainty in
markets right now as a result of the
craziness in this bond market and plenty
of other things going on and you're just
wondering how in the world do I even
just protect my portfolio? How do I keep
on making sure that I'm profiting along
the way? And I'd like to invite you to
join me this Thursday, June 12th, at
7:00 p.m. Eastern time for my Black Swan
Trade Event. It's a completely free
event. I'm going to show you how I've
used Black Swan Trades to take home
returns like 1,700%
in as little as 11 days on a market
event that very few people saw coming
and why I think this may be one of the
best plays to get into right now. And
I'm even going to give away a signed
copy of The Black Swan by Nasim TB and
it's signed by him. This book is worth
hundreds of dollars. But this may be
your last chance to register because
this event is hosted on Zoom and spots
can fill up quickly. So, all you have to
do to secure your spot, click on that
link in the description below. Register
for my event. It's coming up very soon
here on this Thursday. It's June 12th at
7:00 p.m. Eastern time and show up for
the call. As always, it's completely
free. Spots are limited, so don't wait.
See you there. Right now, dollar
denominated debt around the world
exceeds $100 trillion. Most of this debt
is in the shadow banking system. In
other words, it's completely impossible
to do a full audit and see where all
this debt is, who has it all, who owes
it all, what the interest rates are,
what the maturities are, but there's
good estimates that it's at least 60
trillion, probably well in excess of 100
trillion. Now, what do I mean by this?
This is debt that is denominated in
dollars. You're an individual, a
company, a country around the world, and
you want to borrow money from somebody
because you want to spend that on
something that you think will produce
more income or jobs, some growth, but
the lender doesn't want to give you
money that you can control. So, you and
the lender agree to borrow dollars. Now,
the lender has dollars because they've
engaged in some other commerce and they
got dollars from somebody else. So, I
want to borrow dollars. I'm going to
borrow dollars from him. Has nothing to
do with the US. Has nothing to do with
the Fed. Has nothing to do with US
government. There are dollars all around
the world and they are being borrowed
and lent to each other just like we do
that here. There's this weird
misconception out there that if
somebody's in another country, they
can't actually lend money into existence
or borrow money cuz they're not the Fed.
It's like no, when you go to the bank
and you borrow money, when you go do
your job and you get paid dollars, like
you don't have to be the government or
the Fed to do that. Anybody around the
world can get dollars and that's
happened to the tune of about 100
trillion. Now, the key thing here is
this is debt. And the way that debt
works is that debt loans money into
existence, which means that every dollar
that exists has been loaned into
existence. And the hard part to wrap
your head around is that every time that
happens, it creates even more future
demand for that money. Because when I
borrow $100 now in the future, I have to
go get $100 from somebody else plus some
extra dollars. $15, $110 depending on
the interest rate. So every time debt is
created, it creates more demand for more
dollars in the future. Now, this can go
wrong at any moment. One spark can set
off a deflationary death spiral around
the world, evaporating dollars left and
right. Because let's say for whatever
reason, I'm a company, I roll out a bad
product, I can't pay my debt, I default,
I go bankrupt. Let's say the bank that I
borrowed money from was really, really
needing me to pay that money back.
Suddenly, they don't have the dollars
they thought they were going to get. So,
they can't pay dollars to who they owe
dollars to, in this case, depositors,
cuz they're a bank. While there's a bank
run, the bank collapses. Now, everybody
else who had dollars at that bank can no
longer pay dollars to who they owe
dollars to because their money that was
at the bank is not actually there. It's
gone. It's evaporated. It doesn't exist.
This is how a debt default spirals out
of control because it's like a chain of
dominoes. One person can't pay their
debt. It starts wiping out everybody in
line. And all those dollars that
everybody thought were there are not
actually there. Now, a couple years ago,
we all saw how this plays out in the
United States. There was a bank run.
Silicon Valley Bank collapsed and the
Federal Reserve printed up all the
dollars that had already ceased to exist
to replace that money that had
disappeared, making the depositors
whole. But the scary part is central
banks around the world don't have the
ability to do this. They can't just
print up dollars to bail out their own
banks. So instead, they have to call up
the Fed and tap the swap lines and get
dollars from the Fed in order to bail
out their own banks. In fact, this
happened just a couple of years ago with
Credit Swiss. They were on the verge of
collapsing. They had to get bailed out
by the Swiss Central Bank. But the Swiss
central bank didn't have enough dollars
and so the Swiss National Bank had to
make a large draw on its Fed swap line
in order to get those dollars to bail
out credit Swiss. If you don't see the
pattern yet, ddollarization looks like
demand for dollars growing to the point
where there are not enough dollars
sufficient for that demand. A default
then happens and it will lead to a
deflationary spiral like dominoes
knocking out dollars across the system
unless there's an injection of new
dollars that can actually only come from
the Fed. Those new dollars then replace
the assets on balance sheets and slowly
make their way into the system, driving
the value of the dollar relative to
goods and services down. Which is why
you see charts like this with dollar
usage around the world actually going
up. Dollar usage from Swift shows that
dollars are being used at a record high.
This is how Gresham's law works. Bad
money drives out good money. In other
words, if you have two forms of money,
you're going to want to save and hold
and hoard and reserve the one that's
going to preserve its value the most,
and you're going to want to spend the
one that you know is worth less. So,
you're going to want to hoard your gold,
and you're going to want to spend your
dollars. In other words, dollar usage
going up is exactly what you should
expect to see leading up to the death of
the dollar. Not something that happens
overnight, but something that happens
over a long period of time with
volatility along the way with demand for
the dollar continuing to increase over
time. And eventually we get to a point
where governments, even the United
States government, will not be able to
afford to borrow just dollars anymore
because the interest rates will be too
expensive. And that is when you get the
reintroduction of gold bonds or things
maybe even like bitcoin bonds where the
US will repay the dollars that they
borrowed determined by the price of the
asset that is backing that debt like the
gold or the bitcoin. This will mean
governments will be able to borrow at
very attractive rates because there is
built-in protection from real inflation.
If the price of gold goes up because of
too much money printing then as the
lender you are protected. you get back
the appropriate number of dollars for
the price of gold or bitcoin. So the
interest rate will be able to be very
low. So governments will be able to
borrow at a very attractive rate. It
will also force financial responsibility
because if they continue to print and
spend wildly that will drive the cost of
their debt skyhigh. And once this starts
somewhere, governments will be very very
hardpressed to borrow with anything but
collateralized debt like gold bonds or
bitcoin bonds. And once we get to that
point, gold or Bitcoin or whatever asset
is being used to back up the debt has
essentially been monetized or
remonetized. This is how the dollar
dies. With a whimper, not with a bang,
but with massive unpredictable
volatility in both inflation and
deflation along the way. And if you'd
like to know how I am preparing for this
uncertainty with my portfolio, don't
forget to sign up for my Black Swan
trade event. It's coming up in just a
couple of days. link is in the
description below. As always, thank you
so much for watching.