Is the government lying to you about the
cost of your health insurance? Well, if
the data that I'm about to show you is
correct, then the answer is yes. This is
a chart that shows what the government
says is the cost of your health
insurance. The data is pulled from the
consumer price index from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and was compiled into
this chart by Charlie Bello. And as you
can see, over the last 5 years, it is
showing that health insurance costs are
down 19%. Now, over the last 5 years,
I'm sure you've heard politicians on
both sides of the aisle tell you that
inflation is falling. And this is one of
those numbers that gives them the
ability to say that. However, if you
look at this chart, this shows the
reality that your health insurance costs
have actually been rising steadily for
over 25 years. Most people are simply
not aware of how much their health
insurance costs because typically the
employer foots so much of the bill to
the point where in 2024 the average cost
for family coverage when you include the
portion the employer pays is over
$25,000
per year. And it is not slowing down.
Right now insurers are asking for
massive price hikes again for 2026. Blue
Cross Blue Shield asking for a 27% hike
and the largest plans in states like
Washington, Georgia, and Rhode Island
looking to increase by over 20%. In
fact, total health care costs have risen
so dramatically over the past few
decades that they've outpaced pretty
much every other category. This chart
from Visual Capitalist shows price
changes in various categories from the
year 2000 through 2023. And you can see
that two of the top four categories are
hospital services and medical care
services, outpacing almost every other
category of price increases for things
like child care, food, housing, cars,
and electronics. The only other two
categories that have risen at pace with
health care costs are college costs.
It's funny how that works, isn't it? The
two areas that receive some of the most
subsidies from the US government just
happen to have the largest price
increases over the last couple of
decades. Shocker. But it's so bad that
health care costs have now become the
largest expense for most families. This
chart put together by New York Times
shows how health care costs have grown
over the past 80 years and they now
represent a larger portion of the
average family's total budget than every
other category including clothing,
groceries, even housing and utilities.
Now, of course, that is all health care
costs put together. When we go back and
look at this chart that shows the
$25,000 on average that it costs for a
family, this is just health insurance
premiums. That $25,000 that would
otherwise be in your paycheck does not
include things like co-pays, hitting
your deductibles, out-of pocket
maximums, and every now and then when
you accidentally do something that you
thought was in network and that is
actually out of network. And so you get
a whole new set of bills with its own
set of deductibles and out-of- pocket
maximums. So why the disconnect? Why are
the government's figures showing a drop
in costs over the last 5 years when in
reality even just health insurance costs
have continually gone up at one of the
fastest paces compared to any other
category and total health care costs for
families now represent the largest
portion of the budget. Well, just like
Warren Buffett likes to say, "Show me
the incentive and I'll show you the
outcome." And with the US government,
there is always an incentive to under
report price increases if they can. This
is because if inflation is higher, the
government's expenses directly increase.
They have to pay more for social
security. They have to pay more on the
Treasury inflation protected securities,
TIPS. They have to pay more on pensions,
the cost of living adjustments. So, they
don't want their expenses to go up. If
possible, they will under reportport
inflation where they can. So
specifically with health care, how are
they measuring this? They are not
looking at the amount that you are
spending on your health insurance, which
is kind of odd considering they are
telling you that the cost of health
insurance has gone down. Instead, what
they are looking at is retained earnings
of health insurance companies
themselves. That's right. They're
actually just measuring basically
profits of health insurance companies.
They go to health insurance companies
and they say, "How much did you collect
in health insurance premiums this year?"
And then they say, "Okay, now let's
compare that number with how much you
paid out on claims." And whatever the
difference is, whatever is left over is
what the government uses to report
health insurance costs. Now, the
rationale they give for why they measure
health insurance costs this way is
because they say they are trying to
somehow calculate the quality of the
care that you are getting.
In other words, if you just look at the
amount that you pay in your health
insurance premiums, that's not going to
completely tell the whole picture of how
much the total health care costs that
you are getting. In other words, you
might pay a little bit more in your
health insurance premiums, but the cost
of the care that you are getting and
therefore the quality of the care that
you are getting is so much larger that
you are actually getting cheaper health
care because you're getting so much more
for what you're paying. That's how you
can see your health insurance premiums
go up while at the same time they tell
you health insurance costs are going
down. It's simply the difference between
what the health insurance company gets
from you and what they pay out on
claims. And that difference has gone
down over the last 5 years. But
obviously that doesn't make a big
difference to your bank account. So what
can you do about this if anything at
all? It might surprise you, but there is
a growing movement, a large number of
people who are literally just walking
away from the system completely. People
who are literally cancelling their
health insurance plans and not replacing
it with anything. These people tend to
be generally fit, healthy, people who
rarely use their health insurance, if
ever, and are just looking at this
bleeding line on their budget and
saying, "Why am I paying for something
that I never use?" And when I do use it,
it ends up costing me more money anyway.
Now, if just straight up canceling your
health insurance sounds risky to you,
obviously, you're right. One bad car
accident, uh, you get diagnosed with
cancer, you could have millions of
dollars in medical bills overnight. But
many people who are cancelling their
health insurance plans have counted that
cost and are rolling the dice anyway,
saying, "Hey, if something like that
happens, I'm going to have to work out a
plan, a payment plan, negotiate it with
the medical providers anyway, cuz I'm
not just going to be able to fork over
millions of dollars." And often times,
hospitals and medical service providers
are very happy to negotiate with you
because they'd rather get all of the
money from you over a long period of
time with a payment plan rather than
having to sell it to collections and get
a lot less. And it's funny because often
times large medical bills when you do
work out a payment plan and negotiate
the amount down, those payment plans can
end up being very similar to what you
are going to be paying for your medical
insurance premiums anyway. But the
question is, what are these people doing
for their actual health care when they
need it if they don't have insurance?
Well, the first thing is they're still
going to the doctor like normal anyway.
Pretty much every medical provider out
there will have a cash payment option
for you if you tell them, "Hey, I don't
have insurance. how much is this going
to cost? They will tell you the cash
payment amount and then you can just
decide whether or not you want to do it.
Now, when I quit my job as a stock
broker back in 2019 to start Heresy
Financial, I went 2 years without having
health insurance for me and my family.
My kids were young. We went to the
pediatrician all the time and it was
very, very affordable, very easy as
well. And once we got health insurance,
the cost actually went up. Not even
counting the premiums. The cost of just
going to the doctor like normal went up
once we started using insurance. But
it's not just individuals who are
deciding to opt out of this system.
There's a growing network of doctors who
are also fed up with the US health
insurance system and are walking away
from it. These are called DPC or direct
primary care doctors. And a quick Google
search will show you that there are
probably quite a few in your area that
you didn't even know about. These are
medical providers that do not work with
insurance at all. You want a service
from them, you call them up, ask them
how much it will cost, and they tell
you, and you can decide whether or not
you want to do it. Just like any other
free market service or product. Now, on
top of the savings that people are
getting from not having to pay health
insurance anymore and having cheaper
medical services, people are deciding to
become self-insured. In other words,
they take the amount of money they were
spending on health insurance and
healthcare before and they decide to put
that in a separate account. They invest
it, put it in something like some index
funds. There's better options if you
want to invest for better returns. If
you don't know how to do that, I've got
the guide. It's called the hyperrowth
portfolio blueprint linked in the
description below. But they will take
that money, they will invest it, and it
grows for them. And given the amount
that most families spend on their health
insurance premiums, those accounts will
grow extremely fast. Meaning, if you can
just make it through a couple of years
without any catastrophic or unexpected
medical expenses, pretty soon you will
be able to become self-insured because
if there are any large expenses that
come up, you will have the funding. You
will have an account that can pay for
it. Obviously, this is something that
not everybody can participate in. There
are many people, especially in the US
with how unhealthy American citizens
are, who are desperately reliant on
their health insurance. So, please don't
hear me wrong here. I'm not recommending
that anybody do this. I'm not
encouraging anybody to do this. I'm not
even saying it's a good idea. What I am
saying is that just like taxes, if
everybody stopped paying for their
health insurance overnight, the system
would crumble and it would be replaced
with something better that would attract
people to come back because it was
better. Because at the end of the day,
every dollar you spend is a vote for the
way you want the world to be. And unlike
political votes, dollar votes are pretty
effective. And the more expensive US
health care gets, the more people will
choose to opt out of the system. The
less the US health care system serves
the people that need it and want it, the
faster it will be replaced by something
better, especially if all that green
starts flowing somewhere else instead.
As always, thank you so much for
watching. Have a great day.