All eyes are on the Federal Reserve's
interest rate policy, but that might
just be a distraction from the main
thing you should be paying attention to,
which is their balance sheet. And this
is because of the Federal Reserve's
third mandate that has more control over
the bond market, at least according to
Steven Moran, who cited in a
congressional testimony that the Federal
Reserve must pursue moderate long-term
interest rates. Now, if you're sitting
there wondering who the heck is Steven
Moran, well, he's the newest member of
the Federal Reserve, just recently
confirmed by the Senate in a vote 48 to
47. He was confirmed just hours before
the Federal Reserve's 2-day FOMC meeting
began. So, with the highlight that
Steven Moran put on the Fed's third
mandate, what in the world is the Fed's
third mandate? Well, we're all familiar
with the dual mandate. And to be honest,
I don't know why that phrase ever became
popular. Let's go back and look at the
original text and you'll find there are
not two mandates there. There are three.
Right now, we are looking at a copy of
the Federal Reserve Act of 1977.
We're going to scroll down on the first
page to section 2A. The board of
governors of the Federal Reserve System
and the FOMC shall maintain longun
growth of the monetary and credit
aggregates commensurate with the
economy's longun potential to increase
production. Why? so as to promote
effectively the goals of maximum
employment, stable prices, and moderate
long-term interest rates. Those are the
three goals, the three things that
Congress says to the Federal Reserve.
This is the reason you exist, and this
is why we allow you to continue to
exist. And this is now your job, what
you are supposed to do and pursue.
Maximum employment, stable prices, and
moderate long-term interest rates. And
it is that third one that is going to
drive the next decade plus. Before we
get into how that will happen though,
before we get into how the Federal
Reserve moderates long-term interest
rates, I do want to touch on the initial
opening sentence of the Federal Reserve
Act of 1977. That they are to maintain
long-run growth of the monetary credit
aggregates commensurate with the
economy's long-run potential to increase
production. Now in a hypothetical world
that didn't exist. Imagine the number of
dollars, the supply of money was exactly
constant. It couldn't change. It
couldn't increase or decrease. In this
world, we are creating more houses. We
are creating more food. We are creating
more energy efficiency. We are creating
more things, more stuff. There is
innovation everywhere, which means you'd
have the same amount of money chasing
more stuff, more goods and services,
more wealth. The necessary result of
that would be that prices would have to
adjust downwards. Just like if you have
more money, inflation, money printing,
chasing the same amount of goods and
services, you have inflation like we saw
in 2020 2021. The opposite is true as
well. If you have the same amount of
money chasing more goods and services,
you have deflation. But the Federal
Reserve is tasked specifically with
maintaining the growth of the monetary
and credit aggregates commensurate with
the economy's long-run potential to
increase production. In other words, the
monetary and credit aggregates, the
money supply, the growth of spending
power in the economy should grow roughly
at the same rate as the increase in
production. In a world without
intervention, we would see prices
declining and the cost of living getting
cheaper over time and the purchasing
power of your money going up. But
because of the intervention that
Congress has told the Federal Reserve to
do to your money, you lose out on those
cost savings. You lose out on getting
wealthier over time. That purchasing
power is siphoned away from you to the
government, even if prices stay the
same. But just to make sure they're
doing a good enough job at that, stable
prices means 2%. Inflation, which means
prices aren't even staying the same for
you. They're going up. This is why the
Fed exists to transfer purchasing power
as efficiently as possible from the
entire economy to the government. Okay,
so now let's talk about how they do that
with moderate long-term interest rates.
The Trump administration and Treasury
Secretary Scott Bessant have been
pushing the importance of longdated
rates going down for a long time,
specifically for economic growth and
things like home ownership. Long-term
interest rates would be things like the
10-year yield or longer now. The
long-term interest rates matter a lot
more to the economy than the short-term
interest rates. Yes, if short-term
interest rates go up or down, that
affects your high yield savings account.
that affects the yield that you get on
your money market funds, but it doesn't
have that much to do with overall
production and long-term investing in
the United States. The 10-year yield is
a much better benchmark. The reason why
is because if I, just a normal person,
have money that I want to put to work,
but I want to put it in something really
safe, I'm going to consider treasuries
because they are looked at as the
risk-free rate. So, I could give my
money to the US government for 10 years
and get 4% per year on that. Now,
there's other people that want to borrow
my money other than the US government.
So, I could look at Bank of America. I
could look at Amazon. I could look at
Apple. I could look at my friends. I
could look at somebody who wants to
borrow for a mortgage or a car. And if
they all also want to borrow from me at
4%, of course, I'm not going to give
them my money. They don't have the power
of violence and taxing in order to
collect my money in a worst case
scenario. They might default. The US
government at 4% is never going to
default. At the end of the day, even if
they can't tax it, they can still print
it. So, I know I'm going to get the 4%
on my money for the next 10 years if I
give it to the government. Which means
if I am going to give my money, lend it
to somebody else for the next 10 years,
I'm going to need a higher rate than 4%.
Maybe 5%, maybe 6%, who knows? And given
the fact that mortgages are usually
refinanced or paid off within 10 years,
auto loans are creeping up next to 10
years, business loans, commercial real
estate, all these loans have an average
maturity somewhere around 10 years. The
10-year yield is a fantastic benchmark
for determining what interest rates are
for the rest of the economy. In other
words, they set a floor and any risk
added on top will increase yields or
interest rates. So now imagine that the
US government needs to borrow so much
using 10-year bonds only that it drives
interest rates all the way up to 9 or
10% where they've been before. That
means all other borrowing in the economy
would have to again be higher than that,
maybe 11, 12, 13%. Because if I can get
a risk-free 10% from the US government
for 10 years, I'm going to demand a way
higher interest rate from everybody
else. On the other hand, if yields on
the 10-year drop to 3% or 2 1/2% or
lower, then there's room for interest
rates across the rest of the economy to
drop as well. It won't necessarily push
them lower, but it could allow for them
to go lower because if I can only get
2.5% from the US government, that might
not be good enough for me. I might
choose the extra risk for the extra
return. that frees up a bunch of
capital, a bunch of lending to go and be
productive in the actual economy instead
of just going to the government. All
this extra demand to lend to the private
economy can push yields across the
economy lower. But here's the thing, the
Federal Reserve does not control the
10-year. They only control overnight
rates between banks. So, when the Fed
cuts rates, it doesn't necessarily have
any influence on things like the
10-year, which is why last time they cut
rates, which was in September of 2024,
and then they ended cutting rates,
January 2025, it actually made the
10-year yield rise. It went from 3.6%
all the way up to 4.8%. Now, this might
seem counterintuitive, but it's just
about inflation expectations. When the
Fed cuts overnight interest rates, that
makes borrowing for the government
easier. As long as they're borrowing
short-term debt, it makes it cheaper.
They're able to borrow and spend more
money into existence. That increases the
money supply. That's more money chasing
the same amount of goods and services.
That makes prices go up. And if prices
are going to go up, lenders across all
other forms of debt are going to demand
a higher interest rate to compensate
themselves for the loss of purchasing
power. Which is why when the Fed cut
rates starting last September, it made
other forms of interest rates actually
get more expensive. So, the Fed cutting
interest rates isn't going to cut it.
Pun intended. Which brings the question,
how do they actually maintain moderate
long-term interest rates according to
their third mandate? The answer is their
balance sheet. Treasury Secretary Scott
Bessant has talked about how he doesn't
like the negative effects from the Fed
doing QE, although he said that it's
still okay in true emergencies. Here's
the thing, the sovereign debt crisis
would probably be considered a true
emergency by the Treasury Secretary. So,
option one is that we see the Federal
Reserve resume QE and their balance
sheet starts increasing again. You can
think of the Federal Reserve balance
sheet like their brokerage account. They
buy assets. The Fed buys mortgage back
securities and treasuries. These are
forms of debt. And when this debt gets
paid back, they take some of those
dollars that were paid back to them and
buy new debt. In other words, roll it
over, loan it back out into the economy.
But when that balance sheet is
declining, that means some of those
dollars that are getting paid back to
them, they are not rolling that over and
reinvesting it. Those dollars are just
ceasing to exist, which means the size
of their balance sheet goes down. In
other time periods when the balance
sheet is rising, it means they are
creating money, printing money into
existence to go out into the economy,
into the market and buy up assets.
They're lending cash into existence. And
so if the Federal Reserve is tasked with
maintaining moderate long-term interest
rates, and that gets interpreted as the
10-year yield going down, the easiest
way to accomplish this would be for the
Federal Reserve to go out into the open
market and just start buying up 10-year
treasuries with newly printed money.
that drives the price of 10-year
treasuries up, which drives the yield
lower. But that's not the only option.
The Treasury itself could borrow at the
short end with T bills even more and use
that extra borrowing to do a bunch of
buybacks for longerdated bonds like
10-year because right now forever, the
government always spends everything that
it taxes, spends even more, and borrows
the difference. That's called running a
deficit. That's why we have such a large
national debt. And so this proposes that
they would borrow even more at the short
end, like six month T bills or one-year
T bills, and use that extra money
they're borrowing in order to pay back
buy back longerterm bonds. This would be
like you opening up some new credit
cards, getting a cash advance in order
to pay off a longer term personal loan.
Your total debt would stay the same.
You're just transferring some of that
longerterm debt into shorter term debt.
This would be helpful in the short run.
and be like a band-aid for the economy
because the Federal Reserve cutting
rates does influence things like T
bills, which is why those short-term
rates have dropped because they are more
influenced by the Fed cutting rates.
There is more demand for Ta bills from
financial institutions and so the
government does have the ability to
issue more debt at the short end of the
curve. They can use that extra borrowing
and pay off some of that longerterm
debt. The problem is this puts the US
government in a pickle over the long
term because they basically are just
putting their entire national debt into
short-term T bills that constantly roll
over every 6 to 12 months. They're
constantly rolling over $30 trillion
worth of debt. And if short-term rates
ever do go up as a result of that,
that's an instant added cost on the
entire national debt. So, it's a
band-aid in the short term, dangerous
for the government in the long term, but
could provide a boost for the economy in
the meantime because those 10-year
yields going lower would provide
stimulus for economic activity, which
means that we are likely to get some
sort of a return to the playbook from
1942 through 1951 when the Federal
Reserve engaged in yield curve control.
The Fed and the Treasury worked together
to make sure that the Treasury could
borrow at that longer term end of the
yield curve at a rate that was lower
than the rate of inflation. In other
words, a negative real rate. And because
this was enforced on the economy, it
wasn't something that the free market
did to itself. It allowed the government
to offload the cost of its debt onto the
economy. This was very effective at that
time because things like gold ownership
were outlawed. Bitcoin didn't exist. It
was very difficult for the average
person to invest in stocks and it was
considered patriotic to buy things like
US Treasury bonds. But the anticipation
of policies like this are why we are
seeing dramatic rises in things that are
harder assets like Bitcoin and gold and
silver and stocks and real estate. And
if you would like to protect yourself
from the government trying to steal your
purchasing power in order to offload the
cost of its own debt, it might be a good
idea for you to consider some of these
assets as well. If you'd like to hear
more insights about things like this and
especially things that I don't talk
about on YouTube, I've got a free
newsletter. So, if you'd like to see me
in your inbox every week, go ahead and
click on the link in the description
below and I'll see you there. As always,
thanks so much for watching. How day?