You may have heard that the size of the
federal government's workforce has not
really changed in years, even decades.
That it's remained fairly steady. And in
fact, because of the terrible layoffs
happening right now under Trump, the
federal workforce is actually declining.
In fact, you may have seen charts like
this floating around the internet
recently with a staggering 51,000
federal workers being laid off. 51,000
out of the 3 million official federal
government employees. But wait, you say,
because of the government shutdown
that's happening right now, we are now
starting to see massive layoffs, except
for the fact that judges literally just
blocked and shut down these layoffs.
Now, it's true that Trump is going ahead
and trying to proceed with some of these
layoffs anyway, but we'll see how far
along this goes, especially if the
shutdown ends soon. But despite all
that, you'll still see charts like this
showing that the federal government's
workforce is not actually out of
proportion. Since the year 2000, we've
still only had around 3 million total
federal employees. Considering the
growth in the population and GDP,
everybody says, "Look at this. It's
benign. It's not a problem." But I'm
going to show you how that is completely
untrue. It is fictional. It is a
misdirection. And that 3 million number
pales in comparison to the number of
people who actually work for the
government and are funded and supported
by you. The number of official employees
of the federal government has not
changed much in decades. This goes back
far beyond just the year 2000. In fact,
from about 1950 through about 1990, the
number was increasing, but only from
about 2 million to 3 million. And the
number has fluctuated but stayed fairly
steady since the '90s. Now, you might be
thinking, how in the world could the
federal workforce stay the same size
given all of the growth and all the
changes that have happened over decades?
And the answer is contractors. As of
2023, there were 2.1 million people
employed for the federal government in
civil service roles. There are over 1
million people employed in the military,
about half a million people for the post
office, and a staggering 5.2 2 million
people who work for the government as a
contractor and on top of that an
additional 2.3 million people who work
for the US government through grants.
Now, I know you're going to say, "Hey,
this doesn't count." But what counts as
an employee? When I make money and I
want to pay people to work in my
business, I can either hire them as a W2
employee or as a 1099 contractor. There
are legal distinctions about the type of
work, how much they're allowed to work,
what kind of rules I have for the time
that they work, and the deliverables.
There are rules about this. So, it's not
just a tax thing, but at the end of the
day, I'm giving somebody money to do
work for me. And so the legal and the
tax distinctions between a W2 employee
or a 1099 contractor doesn't matter for
the overall point of this video that the
government has way more people working
for it than we like to admit. Well, I
like to admit it, but than most people
like to acknowledge. And now you might
say, well, these are contractors. These
are private individuals, private
businesses, and the government is just
their customer. But it's like how many
of these contractors would exist without
the government being their customer? We
don't have any way to look at that data,
but I'm assuming it's not zero. Given
the size and the scope of the growth of
our government and the regulatory burden
being imposed on our country over the
last 100 years, it would have been
impossible to keep up with this by
maintaining the same federal workforce
size of just a couple million people.
That's why so many have grown through
contracts. And to the extent that a
private company has the government as
its customer, it's not a private
company. It is just an extension of the
government. It's not going out into the
free market to convince other free
individuals to voluntarily pay for a
product or service. A contractor gets a
government contract, meaning they know
somebody or they paid somebody who gives
them the ability to capitalize on
taxation, taking money from individuals
by force involuntarily and just handing
it out to somebody else. Is it an
exchange for a product or service? Yes,
sometimes. But it's involuntary, which
means that people wouldn't have chosen
it otherwise. Therefore, definitionally,
it is part of the government, not a
private free market company. Again, this
is a spectrum. I understand there are
lots of companies who also participate
in the free market and the government is
just one of their customers. But to the
extent that the government is the
customer of a contractor, it is not a
free market business. It is just an
extension of the government. Now, I also
pointed out the staggering number of
people who are employed by the
government through grants. And again,
this is just another extension of the US
government handing money to people to
tell them to do things. We are not
debating here whether or not any of
these are necessary or good or bad. I'm
just pointing out that they exist. If
you get your paycheck by the government
handing you money, you work for the
government. Doesn't matter what research
you're doing or university you work for,
studies you're participating in, you
belong and should be counted as a
government employee. When you add all
these categories up, as of 2023, the
full federal workforce was an a
staggering 11.3
million. Far larger
than the 3 million that everybody always
talks about that's been the same for
decades. They get their growth through
outside work, which is still the
government. And now there's 11.3 million
of them that are being funded and
supported by taking money from your
paycheck. You work in the free market,
you are producing a good or a service
that is greater than the value of what
you are being paid. That's why that free
exchange happens because your work is
worth more to your employer than the
money they're giving up to keep you
employed. And to you, your work, your
labor, your time is worth less than the
amount that you are getting in return
for the paycheck. Otherwise, you would
go somewhere else. That voluntary
arrangement, the government is taking
some of that from you by force. have no
choice in the matter on the amount or
where it goes to and they are handing
that out to 11.3 million people who are
not producing a good or service that
somebody else is voluntarily asking for.
But
11.3 still doesn't scratch the surface
because we're just talking about federal
here. There's other things called states
and cities that also have many
government employees. In fact, when you
look at state employees and local
government employees, you have to add on
over 20 million more employees to this
total number. 5 1.5 million work for
state governments around the country and
15 million people work for local
governments. Now, I'll be the first to
admit I would far rather have more
emphasis being on local government than
on federal government. The more local
you are, the more skin in the game there
is. People often live in or near the
places that they are ruling over. So
they have to deal with the consequences
more. Often times they're aware of the
problems that the local communities are
facing and they can have greater
authority over changing the things that
the people in the local communities
actually care about. In fact, I think
the entire structure of both size and
power should be completely flipped.
Cities should have much more power than
state governments and state governments
should have much more power than the
federal government. That's the way the
Constitution originally designed it. It
should be a bottom-up government. But
that's not the world we live in today.
We live in a top- down government. And
yet, despite that, local governments
workforce have absolutely exploded over
the past 75 years. State governments
have actually done the best. And I know
that on this chart, it looks like it's
above the federal workforce, but
remember this federal workforce number
doesn't count the contractors. The true
federal workforce size is around 11
million. And so we'd have to place the
11 million for the federal government
right around here. So despite the fact
that we don't have a bottom-up
government, local governments actually
employ more people than the federal
government. And keep in mind, every
single person who receives their
paycheck as a result of the government
handing them money is a person who
financially, definitionally speaking, is
not contributing. They are receiving
something somebody else has produced.
Again, you can argue that some of these
jobs are necessary or beneficial or
good. But it is the free market. It is
the pure private sector that actually
produces the money and the capital and
the wealth and the goods and the
services. From that pool that is being
produced, governments will take
altogether large percentages when you
consider both local and state and
federal government taxes. And they will
use that to pay anybody who works for
them to do a job that the private sector
is not doing. And here's the thing
people don't understand about the
private sector. The private sector
operates out of greed. Okay, maybe
people do understand that, but here's
what I mean by that. When I engage in
business, when I sell somebody a product
or a service, when I give my time to
somebody for a paycheck, the transaction
that's happening is one where money is
changing hands. So, if I'm going to go
get a job somewhere and one person will
pay me $30 an hour, but the other person
would pay me $40 an hour for the same
job, I'm going to take the $40 an hour
job. All else being equal. Obviously,
there are other things involved, but if
they're equal, I'll take the higher
paying option. This is how business
works. If I can sell a product for $100
and I can sell a,000 of them or I could
sell a,000 of the exact same product for
$150, I'm going to sell it for $150.
Which means if a product or a service is
not being taken care of by the free
market, it's because all potential free
market actors have looked at that
opportunity and decided that it is not
worth the cost. It is not worth the
risk. It is not worth the investment.
For example, if I'm a sports team, a
private company, and I want a new
stadium, I might run the numbers and
come up with the math on what my return
on that investment will be. And I might
think, you know what, this is not going
to be a great investment because I'm
going to have to spend all these
hundreds of millions of dollars and the
return that I'm going to get might be
negative, might be really low. Either
way, it's just not worth it for me. So,
as a sports team, I'm going to go to the
local government and I'm going to say,
"Hey, you should involuntarily take
money from other people to build this
stadium for us. And don't worry, there's
going to be a lot of extra business
activity from the sports games and
everything that's happening there. You
can run events there. It'll be a great
investment for your city. I pay off the
right people. I know the right people in
power." So the city decides, "Yep, we
are going to build this stadium." In a
situation where the free market had
decided the return on investment
wouldn't be worth it, somebody with a
monopoly on violence who can use force
to pay for things decides to actually do
it. This is why everything that the
government does, fundamentally speaking,
is a drain on resources. It is a net
destruction of wealth. Again, I have to
reiterate just because it is a cost. It
is a net drain on wealth. I am not
making the argument that it all
shouldn't happen. You can make a
compelling case that there are many
government jobs that are necessary or
beneficial. But you cannot
mathematically state that it is not a
drain on wealth because it is only
funded by taking from what somebody else
has produced. And I know you've probably
already started to do the math, but when
you add up the entire government
workforce, the number is not pretty.
This chart puts together all employees
of the federal government, but just the
3 million, the official employees. And
it also puts together the local
government employees and the state
government employees. As of August of
2025, there are over 23 12 million
full-time employees of local, state, and
federal governments. It's important to
note this data set does not include
military. It does not include the CIA,
the NSA. For some reason, the National
Imagery and Mapping Agency or the
Defense Intelligence Agency, we know the
military is a little over 1 million. So,
we can immediately add 1 million to this
number. So, now we're at 24 1.5 million.
Postal workers were included.
Contractors were not, so we can add
another 5.2. And grant workers are
another 2.3, so we can add another 2.3,
which brings our total to over 32
million people. And we know that number
is conservative because some of this
data comes from 2023 and parts of the
government have expanded since then.
Just to put in perspective how many 32
million people is the current population
of the United States is about 334
million people which means 10% of the
entire US population citizens plus
non-citizens included. 10% of all people
work for the government. For every 10
people, there's one person who gets a
paycheck by taking money from the other
nine. But guess what? All 330 million
people in the United States don't work.
In fact, the majority of people in the
United States do not have jobs. This
makes sense, right? There's kids,
there's stay-at-home moms, there's some
stay-at-home dads, there's retired
people who live off of their own savings
and investments. There's retired people
who also live off of money from other
working people, but that's a whole other
bucket that we don't have time to get
into today. Of the 330 million people in
America, how many people do you think
have jobs? Now, I'm not talking about
how many jobs there are in the United
States, because that's a deceiving
number. One person might have two or
three jobs. If you work at Taco Bell and
McDonald's and Burger King all
part-time, that's counted as three jobs,
but it's still just one person. So, how
many people have jobs? Any job
whatsoever? According to the Federal
Reserve, that number is about 163
million. And that includes a 16-year-old
who just got their first part-time job
sweeping floors at a movie theater. It
includes a single mom who's working a
couple of jobs to put food on the table
for her kids at home. But it's almost
half the population which means that for
every 10 people there are in the United
States five of them are actively working
doing jobs making money but one of those
people works for the government which
means they are getting paid by four of
the people who are actually working
producing because 10% of the population
works for the government. Half the
population works in total. So, for every
10 people, four people are actually
producing. And then there's one who
looks like they have a job because they
go in and they clock in and clock out
every day and they do work and they
follow procedures and they attend
meetings, but they are only getting paid
by money being taken away from the four
who produce who are also, by the way,
taking care of the other five because
the other five are kids and other people
who can't work. which means 40%
approximately of the entire population
is producing enough to actually take
care of everybody else. So, the next
time you hear somebody say that we need
to raise taxes, that the government
going broke or running a deficit is
because we're not taxing people enough,
how about the first thing we do is stop
taking so much away from the minority of
people who are actually producing, who
are actually making the money, making
the goods, making the services that
support literally everybody. And that
one person who is in power, who is
living off of the four people producing,
maybe we should have less of them. And
maybe they should be forced to come up
with a skill, sell a product or a
service that people in the real world
actually would want and voluntarily pay
for. And maybe 10% of the entire US
population being employed by a
government and 20% of all job holders
working for a government. Maybe it's
time we look at that and say, "You know
what? That number's a little too high.
Maybe we should try going in the other
direction for a little while." Because
at the end of the day, even if all of
them were to get laid off, and none of
them could find a job and they all went,
let's say, on welfare, the four people
working would still be paying for them
and supporting them. So nothing would
change except for the fact that our
lives would get easier because we
wouldn't have so many people regulating
us and breathing down our backs, telling
us what we can and cannot do with our
own property. Even then, life would be
easier. If you like this video, send it
to somebody you think would appreciate
it, or just keep it in your back pocket
cuz those holidays are coming up and you
might need some good conversation to
start start a political talk at your
next family holiday. As always, thanks
so much for watching. Have a great day.