Financial institutions just tapped the
Federal Reserve's standing repo facility
for the largest amount ever since its
creation. Take a look at this chart. You
can see the Fed's standing repo facility
rarely gets any use. Recently, it has
been getting more and more use until
Friday, October 31st, we had a massive
record spike. Zooming in on just the
recent time period, you can see that
even though Monday, November 3rd, saw a
decline in usage, it was still higher
than it's ever been. If that's all Greek
to you, basically it just means that
liquidity in the financial system is so
low right now. Banks are running to the
Federal Reserve to get the liquidity
from them because they can't get it from
each other. The question is number one,
why is this happening? And number two,
should you be concerned? The first thing
to know about why this is happening
right now is the Fed's balance sheet.
You can see after the massive
quantitative easing that ended in 2022,
the Federal Reserve has been doing
quantitative tightening for the last
couple of years. Now, they recently
announced that quantitative tightening
will be coming to an end on December
1st. So, their balance sheet will remain
the same from that point on until they
eventually inevitably start QE yet
again. But quantitative tightening does
the exact opposite of quantitative
easing. Quantitative easing is when they
print money to buy assets. It injects
liquidity into the financial markets.
Quantitative tightening, which is what's
been happening for the last couple of
years as their balance sheet has been
declining, withdraws liquidity from
financial markets. They've been doing
this on purpose to deal with all the
inflation they unleashed from all the
money printing and it has been
successful in reducing liquidity in the
financial system as evidenced by the
reverse repo facility declining in
usage. This is the account at the Fed
where banks go to dump their excess
reserves and you can see over the last
couple of years this has gone to zero.
So quantitative tightening for the last
couple of years has drained excess
reserves in the system to basically
zero. But why is it that only recently
the standing repo facility has been
getting massive usage out of it? Again,
the standing repo facility is where
banks go when there's not enough
liquidity.
So why now? Well, it mostly has to do
with this, which is the Treasury General
Account. The Treasury General Account is
the United States government's checking
account. Every time they take a dollar
from you in taxes or they borrow a
dollar from JP Morgan, all of those
dollars go into the Treasury General
account, which is the federal
government's checking account. And then
anytime they spend any money, it goes
out of there. Well, what has the
government been doing for the past
month? Not spending money. Well, it's
been spending money, but it's been
spending a lot less money because of the
government shutdown. So, if we zoom in
on just the recent portion of this
chart, we can see a recent huge spike in
the Treasury General account to the
point where now there's $957 billion in
the Treasury General account because the
government's still taking your dollars
in taxes and the government's still
borrowing more money cuz this isn't a
debt sealing shutdown. It's just a
disagreement about the discretionary
portion of the budget. And so, they're
still getting dollars into the Treasury
General account. They're just not
spending as many, which means this
Treasury General account is spiking. Now
the Treasury General account is outside
of the financial system. It used to be
part of the banking system. It used to
be an account in the banking system just
like other bank accounts. But you can
see here the Treasury general account
started to get used in 2008. And that's
because at that time the Federal Reserve
wanted to make sure that all of the
quantitative easing and money printing
wouldn't cause issues with excess
deposits in the banking system. So they
had the federal government's account
moved out of the banking system and now
it's just a separate account held at the
Fed themselves. So the United States
government doesn't keep their checking
account inside the banking system
anymore. They just have their account
directly with the Fed. And that means
that any dollars flowing into the
Treasury General account are dollars
that are right now leaving the financial
system. So for the last couple of years,
we've had quantitative tightening which
takes dollars out of circulation. This
has resulted in the $2.5 trillion of
excess reserves going to zero. And now
over the last month, we have seen the
Treasury General account spike to $957
billion as the US government has been
spending a lot less because of the
shutdown. And that means that banks are
having to run to the Federal Reserve to
say, "Hey, please give me some
short-term cash cuz I don't have
enough." So the answer to the question
of why this is happening right now is a
the last couple of years the Fed has
been draining liquidity from the system
in order to undo all the excess
liquidity they pumped in in 2020 and
2021. Over the last month, the Treasury
general account has been sucking even
more cash out of the financial system
because they're still taking just as
much out, but they're just not putting
as much back in as they normally do. As
a result, banks don't have the liquidity
they need, so they're running to the
Federal Reserve to get it. Now the
second question is this a cause for
concern? Well, in my opinion the short
answer is no. But the long answer is it
depends because if you go back a little
bit in time, this is actually something
that has led to major causes for
concern. Sometimes the biggest. So if we
zoom out on this chart, which is the
Federal Reserve's intervention in the
repo market, we can see the last time
that we had a spike bigger than what
we're seeing right now is 2019. And
before that, it was the financial
crisis. And that's because when banks
don't have the liquidity they need, they
shut down sometimes within one day. That
is exactly what happened during the
great financial crisis when all of the
banks had a bunch of collateral, but
that collateral was mortgage back
securities. And when they all realized
it was bad collateral, none of them
would accept it as collateral from each
other for overnight cash. So the banks
that couldn't get cash because they had
too much bad collateral started to
collapse. This would have happened to
every single one of them except for the
Fed intervened and decided to be the one
who bought all that bad collateral and
gave the banks the liquidity they
needed. This is why during 2019 when
banks started asking for liquidity again
and couldn't get it from each other,
everybody started to freak out thinking
it was a repeat of the financial crisis.
But in 2019, it wasn't an issue with bad
collateral. It was an issue of low
liquidity, just not enough cash in the
system. And that is because underneath
the administration at the time, the
government had been spending and
borrowing way more than it had in a very
long time, sucking the financial system
dry. And if we look at the Treasury
General account, we can see that that's
exactly what is happening again this
time. Now, in 2019 and during the great
financial crisis, the Federal Reserve
did not have what they have now, which
is called a standing repo facility,
which means at those times they had to
make an active decision. Are we going to
intervene in the repo market or are we
not going to intervene? This is why
during 2019 we saw the repo rate spike
which is what caused so many people to
have so much concern because as banks
went to go get cash from each other they
couldn't. So the interest rate started
to spike. But as of 2021 the Federal
Reserve created something called the
standing repo facility which just means
they are always ready to intervene in
the repo market with that facility for
any amount necessary. And because they
maintain the minimum bid rate on the
standing repo facility, it ensures that
we don't get a repo rate spike because
anytime there are liquidity needs in the
financial system greater than what the
financial system can handle, instead of
paying higher interest rates, they just
go to the Fed to get it. And that's why
we didn't see any change in the standing
repo facility interest rate because the
Fed just prints what is necessary. It's
also why we didn't see any spike in the
secured overnight financing rate, which
is the rate that replaced Liebore. all
we didn't get any spikes in interest
rates and that's just because ever since
2021 the Fed has this facility called
the standing repo facility. It's an
account that's ready and waiting to be
used anytime the financial system needs
liquidity. And so even though we got
this massive spike in usage, the
liquidity is there. So what is going to
happen next as a result? Well, number
one, like I mentioned at the beginning
of the call, the Federal Reserve is
putting an end to quantitative
tightening as of December 1st. So even
if the liquidity conditions worsen over
the next month, as of December 1st, they
will start to get better. And the reason
why is because they're not just going to
maintain their balance sheet with an
equal composition of everything on their
balance sheet. In fact, they're going to
be doing a stealth QE and providing
liquidity to the market through buying T
bills. And they're going to be doing
that by letting mortgage back securities
run off their balance sheet. So even
though their balance sheet will stay the
same at approximately $6.5 trillion,
they'll still be buying more and more
Treasury bills as those mortgage back
securities run off their balance sheet.
In terms of liquidity for financial
institutions, this will be a positive, a
net benefit. Now the other thing is
actual QE will have to restart at some
point and probably soon here, probably
within quarter 1 of 2026. The reason why
is because we have a federal government
that is running $2 trillion annual
deficits and growing every single year
with no signs of slowing down. A central
bank cannot keep a balance sheet at the
same level in that environment. It has
to monetize that debt at some point. And
given the fact that bank reserves are
around 3 trillion and if we zoom in
recently, we can see it starting to dip
down. And given the fact that we know
the Federal Reserve wants bank reserves
to stay around 3 trillion, doesn't want
them dipping too low, it means that the
Federal Reserve maintaining the same
size balance sheet is not going to last
long. They're going to have to restart
QE again, probably within the next few
months. And the final thing to know is
most of these liquidity issues are being
caused by the government shutdown
happening just right now. With a $957
billion Treasury general account and
growing, sucking liquidity out of the
financial system, it is going to make
these short-term liquidity issues
consistent and possibly growing until
the government shutdown ends. But once
that government shutdown ends, all of
that pent up spending from the US
government is flooding out all at once,
which is going to be a burst of sudden
temporary liquidity to undo all of the
temporary tightening the Treasury
General account had caused up until now.
It is very unlikely, in my opinion, this
has any meaningful impacts on markets or
the economy overall. Even financial
institutions are going to be okay
because they're just going to tap the
standing repo facility at the Fed. So,
for the short term, we will probably see
more volatility, probably see more
liquidity issues. Once the government
shutdown ends, we're going to see a
burst of liquidity as all that pent-up
money gets spent. But over the next
couple of months, we will see liquidity
deteriorate slowly as financial
conditions tighten, forcing at some
point the Federal Reserve to start up QE
yet again. Even though they'll already
be doing stealth QE by keeping their
balance sheet the same and rotating out
of mortgage back securities into
Treasury bills, that won't be enough for
the long term. Hope that explanation
helps and allows you to avoid some of
the people out there saying that this is
going to cause the collapse of the
entire financial system and also helps
you avoid everybody on the other side
saying pay no attention to the uh man
behind the green curtain. As always,
thank you so much for watching. Every
time.