Investor sentiment has rarely been as
low as it is right now. Despite the fact
that the stock market is basically back
up to all-time highs, the fear and greed
index is still reading extreme fear
territories. And it's not for no reason.
There are plenty of reasons to be
pessimistic about the economy and the
stock market right now. Everything from
fears about an AI bubble about ready to
crash to the fact that the jobs market
is starting to look very bleak with this
being the first year with multiple
negative months since 2020 and the fact
that delinquencies on debt from student
loans to credit cards to auto loans are
spiking. Many people rationally are
fearful about the near future
financially speaking. With that in mind,
is there any reason to be bullish? Is
there any data that makes the outlook
optimistic? Because it's all fine and
good to just say be greedy when others
are fearful, but what if the people are
fearful correctly? Because it's very
easy to say be greedy when others are
fearful. But if you're anything like me,
you probably want a little bit of data
going into that decision if you're going
to act on it. So, the first thing that
you probably haven't seen in the news
lately is that retail sales have
increased about 4% over the past year.
And that's despite the fact that
consumer sentiment has dropped off a
cliff during that period of time. This
is why consumer sentiment or even a
retail investor sentiment for that
matter is often considered to be a
contrarian indicator because people are
the most fearful or the most greedy at
the absolute bottoms or the absolute
tops when in fact the data showing what
people are actually doing is showing
that people are actually spending more.
But often times individual behavior can
be financially uh reckless. Let's just
say for the least. It's not just
individuals though. It's not just retail
sales. When we look at spending by large
corporations, we see capex spending from
tech and tech related stocks is off the
charts right now. And again, many people
might look at this as a sign of a
bubble. But typically, if a market is at
the top of a bubble, you don't see
Berkshire Hathaway taking a stake in one
of the companies that is doing some of
the most spending in that area. More
often than not, Berkshire Hathway taking
a large stake in a company near the
beginning of big bull markets, not at
the end. But it's not just investor
behavior. If we take a look at monetary
policy, we now see that interest rate
cuts by the Fed are now priced in at an
87% chance of happening at the next
meeting. We're moving forward into an
environment that is largely an easy
money environment. For the past couple
of years, things have been tight ever
since they unleashed all that inflation
from all the money printing. For a
couple of years, they were trying to
pull back on that. They didn't really do
the best job, but they were raising
interest rates. They were lowering their
balance sheet and they did drain quite a
bit of liquidity out of the system. That
has come to an end now, come to a
screeching halt. They have pivoted. They
have reversed course. They're cutting
rates and ending the tightening phase.
Looking at the implementation notes from
the last FOMC statement, we see that
beginning on December 1st, Federal
Reserve will roll over at auction all
principal payments from the Fed's
holdings of Treasury securities, which
means any treasuries that get paid back
to the Fed, Fed will take that cash and
just go out to the market and buy more
treasuries. They won't let them bleed
off their balance sheet anymore. But it
doesn't stop there because again
starting on December 1st, they will also
be reinvesting all principal payments
from the Fed holdings of agency mortgage
back securities into Treasury bills. In
other words, all the mortgage back
securities as they get paid off and
bleed off the balance sheet of the Fed,
they're going to take all that extra
cash and also roll that into T bills.
This is taking liquidity from one area
of the market, mortgage back securities,
and injecting it into the broader
economy overall through decreasing the
cost of government borrowing. And
therefore, the government can spend more
money, print more money into existence
easier. And it's not just the Federal
Reserve doing this. Central banks all
around the world have recently stopped
raising rates or started cutting. So
from a monetary policy standpoint around
the world, we are entering into an
easing cycle where liquidity is
increasing. And if you've wondered why
gold has skyrocketed like 100% over the
last 2 years or so, it's because it
fronts monetary policy. Or more
accurately, it's because the people who
are buying gold, driving the price
higher and higher, know that they are
about to change monetary policy.
[laughter]
Next up on the list, we have wages. Now,
there was a period of time where real
wage growth was steeply negative, which
is to be expected. This is how the canon
effect works. When new money gets
printed, first it gets paid and goes to
the hands of whoever is closest to the
money printer. So, it goes to the
government first, then it goes to the
politically connected. As that money
gets spent the first couple of times
from one person's bank account to the
next, prices have not yet had the time
to adjust. they haven't had the
increased demand from the increased
amount of money in order to get bit up.
But as that money gets spent through the
economy, filters its way down into the
paychecks and the wages of individuals,
prices have now gotten bit up. Which
means by the time people get raises and
get those wage increases, prices have
already run away from them. And so when
you adjust for that inflation, the real
wage growth is negative. However, for 29
months now, real wage growth has been
positive. Now, again, here you have to
trust that the official inflation
numbers they're using to adjust nominal
wages are accurate. And that is very
easy to contest, and I'm with you on
that. But what is also true is that if
you compare what's going on now to what
was going on before, at least it is much
better. So, it's possible, maybe even
probable, that wages are still not quite
keeping up with inflation, but they're
getting a lot closer now than they were
a couple of years ago. Now, even though
wage growth has been increasing, a lot
of people are still concerned that
everybody is still losing jobs. The
problem with that is that initial
jobless claims are actually moving down.
They're at their lowest level right now
since August, which means if everybody
was actually getting laid off right now,
this number would be moving up, not
down. Now, the next big piece that a lot
of people are mostly not going to look
at is corporate bond sales, which so far
in 2025 just hit a new record at about 6
trillion. It may not be apparent on the
surface why that would be a bullish
thing for the economy or for markets,
but what are corporations going to do
with money that they borrow? They're
going to spend it. And corporations do
not spend money the way that individuals
do. Yeah, you might have some executives
paying a little bit more for some
private flights or first class upgrades
or a renovation in the corner office
suite, but for the most part,
corporations are looking for a positive
ROI on their money. And when they
borrow, they have to pay interest on
that, which means they're planning to
spend that money in a way that will make
them more than what they owe. That is
the entire point of running a business.
It's called profit.
>> [laughter]
>> And that's what businesses try and do.
Which means when you see corporate
borrowing skyrocketing and hitting new
records, it also means corporate
spending on things that are planned to
make more money is also going to go up.
This means things like spending on R&D,
on hiring, on building new factories,
buying new properties, increasing
production. These are signs that you see
coming out of a recession or coming out
of a difficult economic time. These are
not things that you tend to see right at
the beginning or at the top. At the
beginning or at a top is when you start
to see everybody pull back on spending,
hunkering down for the hard times. And
so while it may seem that everything is
about ready to implode and collapse, it
might just be your cognitive bias,
looking for evidence that matches what
you think is true. I'm not making the
claim here that everything is beautiful
and hunky dory and bury your head in the
sand and just pretend everything is
going to be okay. I'm presenting
evidence that maybe the near financial
future might not actually look like a
catastrophe. And here's the most
important part. Markets climb a wall of
worry. And so if you are expecting
everything to implode and you have
positioned yourself to only be able to
profit if you are right, you are setting
yourself up for failure. Because the
mark of a good investor is not how many
times you are right versus how many
times you are wrong. It is all about how
much you make when you are right versus
how much you lose when you are wrong. So
look at the evidence and invest
according to what is happening, not what
you think should be happening. That is
at least as long as you actually want to
make money, which at the end of the day
is actually the goal of investing. As
always, thank you so much for watching.
Have a great day.