Artificial intelligence continues to be
one of the most contentious topics in
investing, economics, politics, and
business. And I've finally figured out
why so many people disagree about what
the impacts of artificial intelligence
will be on the economy. You have some
people saying that it's going to bring
around a utopia where nobody will ever
have to work again. There will be
universal high income available for
everybody where all of your wants and
needs are met by robots. Essentially,
all of life will be like an
all-inclusive cruise ship that is
managed by machines. On the other side
of the spectrum, though, you have people
saying that it will bring about a
dystopia with the most extreme wealth
inequality this world has ever seen.
with a few technocrats holding the
control of all the world's resources and
everybody else destitute, no longer able
to get any jobs because the robots do
all the jobs, which means that most
people will have no income to be able to
afford anything they need. And the
fundamental misunderstanding that
contributes to these extreme views is
not recognizing that technology is
deflationary, yet we live in an
inflationary world. So the question is
what happens when an unstoppable
deflationary force impacts an immovable
inflationary wall? Once you understand
this, you'll be able to see how this
plays out into the future. So first,
what do I mean by AI being deflationary?
AI is just a tool. It is just
technology. There is no qualitative or
categorical difference between AI and
any other technology humans have ever
invented or innovated. Starting back at
the beginning, we have the first
original invention that caused a
creation of wealth, which was fire. If
you look at like gorillas and monkeys,
they spend and pretty much every animal
actually, they spend 100% of their time
looking to acquire food. One of the
reasons for this is because the nutrient
density of raw food is pretty low.
Another reason for this is that if all
of your warmth is coming from just
caloric intake and you don't have any
external source of warmth, you need a
higher caloric intake. And so fire being
used as a technology or a tool allowed
people to cook their food and get more
nutrients out of their food for the
exact same level of work. It also
reduced food born illnesses, which
allowed you to spend more time doing
more productive things, maybe even
living longer. And you didn't need to
consume as much food because you were
getting some of your warmth from that
fire rather than just burning the
calories. And so what fire did was
allowed humans to get more with less.
That is the definition of growth. And
it's why growth and deflation in reality
are two words describing the exact same
thing. More output, less input. Getting
more for less. Now, kind of the next big
leap from there you could say was
farming. Instead of having to go out and
find our food from hunting and foraging,
spending all that energy and all that
labor going out and trying to find it,
we brought the food to ourselves, put
the animals in cages, planted the
plants, the fruit trees, and the
vegetables that we wanted near our
homes, and we cultivated them. This gave
us way more abundance of food than we
had ever had. It gave it to us where we
needed it. So, we didn't have to spend
as much time going out just to procure
food. we could spend more of our time
and more of our labor doing other things
that we wanted or needed more like
shelter and clothing and again maybe
just having an easier time staying
alive. This innovation spread across the
world known as the agricultural
revolution and again was a big leap
forward in terms of growth, getting more
for less. And it is deflationary because
it requires less of your human labor, a
lower cost in human labor terms to get
the things that you want. Instead of
humans having to spend all day hunting
and foraging, now we spend less time
working for food and we can allocate
that to more productive things. Another
step up from there was the invention of
things like tractors. So now instead of
needing dozens or maybe even hundreds of
people to work a farm, now you have
machines that can do the work of dozens
or hundreds of humans just with one
person operating the machine. Not only
that, but maybe it does it even better.
So you get more food output with far
less human input. This industrial
revolution obviously infiltrated
everything, not just food production. We
got steam engines that moved trains that
increased the ability for humans to
transport goods and themselves all
across the world and the nation instead
of having to walk and ride a horse. And
that allowed goods that were more
cheaply produced in one area to be
transported to another area. And even
with the cost of transportation
included, it was now cheaper to get it
from a farther location. Again, the cost
of everything starts to go down when you
calculate it in terms of human labor.
The amount of time you have to spend
working and doing something in order to
get the stuff that you want and need
goes down over time. This is the story
of all of human history. By the way, as
humans invent and as humans innovate and
as humans find new ways to produce more
things more efficiently, the cost of
acquiring the stuff that we want, in
other words, wealth goes down. The
invention of electricity meant that
lighting and heating were much more
accessible because that thing that
people wanted was more abundant now by
getting it from electricity instead of
candles and lamps meant that we got more
for less. By the way, all along this
process, the people who were involved in
producing those things that became
obsolete did lose their jobs. This is
the part of innovation and creation that
people don't like to acknowledge. It's
called destruction. Joseph Shumpeder
famously coined the term creative
destruction and it's because those are
two sides of the coin of progress. You
cannot get more for less unless you do
away with the thing that was causing you
to get less for more. Candle makers lost
their jobs making candles because people
started buying light bulbs instead. It
would have been a disaster if the
government had stepped in and said, "We
need to protect the candle makers from
losing their jobs. They're important to
our economy and we need to outlaw and
regulate electricity and light bulbs so
that these people are protected. That
would have been preposterous. Even very
simple things like plastic being
invented from fossil fuels. That
actually saved the turtles. Most people
don't realize that turtles were on the
verge of going extinct because we were
using their shells for things that we
use plastic for today. And that allowed
the turtles to start thriving again
because we no longer needed to go
through the costly process of acquiring
turtles just for their shells. So
unfortunately for all of you
environmentalists and tree huggers out
there, fossil fuels and oil saved the
turtles. And so many of the things that
we use technology for today, and by
technology in this sense, I'm talking
about like modern-day electronics like
laptops and iPhones, these give people
access to things that we didn't even
have the ability to have access to even
50 years ago for any cost. And now even
the poorest people in our society have
access to these things. Again, progress,
growth, deflation, it's all just getting
more for less. Today on Earth, we have
the same amount of resources that we've
always had throughout all of human
history. We're able to get a lot more
wealth from those resources than we ever
have been able to in the past. Now,
because we're talking about the real
definitions of deflation and growth and
progress here, I know that it can be a
little bit jarring because every time
you go to the store, every time you look
at a price, the number has gone up. And
so, it doesn't feel like life is getting
cheaper. It doesn't feel to most people
like you're getting more for less. And
that is true. We are going to talk about
that in a moment. But when you measure
things over the long term, 10, 20, 30,
40, 50 years, 100 years, 500 years,
thousand years, the story of humanity is
getting more for less. When you measure
it in terms of the amount of human labor
required to get those things and every
step along the way, when we are able to
find a way to replace human labor in one
area with machines, it means those human
jobs become irrelevant. And the
long-term story of human history is that
people then just start doing other
things that are more productive instead.
Higher output. Now, the last piece that
we have to talk about when we're talking
about the long-term history of deflation
is that just because specific jobs get
replaced by machines doesn't mean that
those specific people actually don't
have a job anymore. Consider the
computer. And I don't mean by the
computer like a laptop. What I mean by
computer is the job that was done by
humans to take a pencil and a paper and
do calculations by hand. In other words,
compute. That was a job. Whether you
were at a bank or a grocery store or you
were an engineer, it was a fairly common
job, especially at larger businesses, to
be a computer. It was your job to
literally do math by hand on paper. Now
a rational person a 100red years ago if
you were to tell them hey in the future
there will be a machine that will be
able to do all the math that any person
computer today can do and do it way
faster do way better and do way more
math. That person would rationally
assume that the person who was
responsible for being a computer would
then be out of a job. But that's not
actually what happened. Those people by
and large became programmers. You ever
see the movie Hidden Figures that talks
about the black women at NASA who are
responsible for putting the first man on
the moon? Well, that is exactly what I'm
talking about here. Instead of just
being replaced by machines, those people
became way more productive than they
ever had before by using the machines
themselves. Not only that, but it
actually lowered the barrier to entry
for positions like that because since it
was so much more productive, it
increased the ROI on hiring a person
like that, which meant that now
lowerkilled people had the opportunity
to get into positions where they could
use those tools and be way more
productive than they could be without
those tools. What that means boiled down
into realworld actionable talk is that
innovations breed job increases on net
overall. Most jobs that people do today
did not exist a 100red years ago, let
alone thousand years ago. The only way
we can get to a point where humans are
doing jobs that they actually want to do
is if we can outsource all the human
labor that we don't want to do to
machines. This is a good thing, not a
bad thing. And now the segue to the
world that we actually live in where
prices go up because up until fairly
recently in history about 1913
prices actually went down over time.
Real prices like the number on the price
tag over time would go down for
everything. When you look at basically
the entire history of the 1800s, we have
a lot of data from those time periods.
And as long as you take out the civil
war where they actually instituted a
fiat currency, the greenbacks, that's
why there was a spike of inflation
there. If you take that out, the entire
1800s, basically up until about 1910,
maybe 1913, prices went down. This is
the price of everything. Food, shelter,
clothing, transportation, the cost of
living continuously went down. What that
also meant was that wages went down.
Pretty much every year, your salary,
your hourly wage, the amount you got
paid for the work that you do would go
down. today that would scare that would
terrify people. But the thing is the
cost of living dropped more. So right
now if your salary goes from 100,000 to
105,000 over the course of one year, but
your cost of living goes from 100,000 to
110,000 over that same time period,
you're actually falling behind. The way
that it would work historically though
is that your cost of living would drop
by more than your wages would drop by.
And so, yes, your salary might drop from
100 grand down to 95 grand, but your
cost of living would drop from 100 grand
down to 90 grand. This meant that your
savings continually gained in purchasing
power. So, you didn't have to worry
about risking your assets, your savings
on investments that were too risky just
to keep up with inflation. And it meant
you could just focus on increasing your
skills, working hard, saving, and then
investing in a good investment when you
finally came around to it. people
weren't required to be part-time
financial adviserss and part-time
investors just to be able to keep up
with inflation. Now, the downside to
this is that asset prices would fall as
well. When you think about something
like a house, that is something that
falls apart. It is literally in physical
reality a depreciating asset. It's
something that requires maintenance,
repairs, upkeep, and over time as more
and more of them are made, the abundance
of that thing goes up, the scarcity goes
down, which means the value relative to
everything else will go down. If you
have a renter in there, the rent would
fall pretty much every year. But
overall, the cost of living went down
far quicker because the abundance was
increasing so much more. This was real
growth. And all that ended in 1913. When
we get into the modern world where the
entire economy is built on an
inflationary foundation. Today, money is
lent into existence. Every dollar in
circulation, every dollar in every bank
account and brokerage account and 401k
came into existence through a loan. You
deposit $1,000 into your bank account.
Your bank takes, let's say, $900 of
that, loans it out to somebody else
through a credit card loan or a
mortgage, and then that person when they
receive that money and their bank as a
deposit, it gets reloed out by that bank
again, over and over and over and over
again. Even though your bank account on
your app or on a computer screen, it
says you got $1,000 in there, they
didn't leave it there. They took it and
they're out there doing something with
it. Which means if you and everybody at
the bank try and get your money back,
it's not actually there. The same dollar
is rehypothecated over and over and over
again, relent out from person to person
to person, representing what looks like
a new deposit every step of the way. But
again, it's the same dollar just being
relent over and over and over again.
Those deposits aren't actually real.
Now, in the practical sense, they're
real because you can go get it and you
can spend it. But again, if everybody
tried to do it at the exact same time,
it's not there. This is what leads to
bank runs and why banks collapse and the
money is just gone because it was never
there in the first place. Historically,
when this would happen, a bank run would
happen, the bank would collapse, the
money would just not be there, and so
the money that people thought was there
would disappear and you get a
contraction and you get a deflationary
collapse because now there's no more
fake money running around keeping prices
up. This is exactly what happened in the
Great Depression. The easy credit
environment of the 20s caused the
roaring 20s. there was a false expansion
of the money supply through easy credit.
And then once the first default happened
or the first person just decided to pay
back instead of reinvesting that money
along the way, as soon as that expansion
stops, it starts to violently unwind.
The money that people thought was going
to be there won't be there. So, they
default and you get a deflationary
default collapse. After the Great
Depression, the Federal Reserve vowed to
never let something like that happen
again. In fact, even Milton Freriedman,
the person that many people say, you
know, champion of free markets, when he
made the claim that inflation is always
and everywhere a monetary phenomenon,
when he was making that claim, he was
saying that because he was saying the
Federal Reserve should have never let
the Great Depression happen because
inflation is the opposite of deflation.
It's a monetary phenomenon. They should
have just printed the money to stop it.
You print enough money that bids prices
up enough where a deflationary collapse
stops in its tracks. And that is what
the Fed vowed to do, which is never let
a deflationary collapse like the Great
Depression happen ever again. Which is
why they always lean on inflation rather
than letting things get even close to
deflation. It's why they target 2 3%
instead of 0%. It's because if the money
supply doesn't keep increasing, it
violently contracts. Every dollar that
is lent into existence eventually has to
get paid back with interest, which means
all inflation today is future deflation
baked into the cake. So if you stop
increasing the money supply that future
deflation starts to happen and unwinds
the whole thing. They have to keep
printing. They have to keep on borrowing
money into existence. They have to keep
that going and have to keep that number
going up. Otherwise everything collapses
in a collapse way bigger than the Great
Depression. Which means today growth is
measured in number go up. Because if the
money supply keeps on going up the cost
of living keeps on going up which means
your money is losing purchasing power.
If money is losing purchasing power, the
number of money that you have has to
keep on increasing faster than it's
bleeding. In other words, if your cost
of living goes from 100,000 to 110,000,
you have to make sure that your salary
goes from 100,000 to at least 111,000.
And that's true for assets, that's true
for wages, that's true across the board
because growth is now measured in the
number going up. So, we have to invest
to keep up with the money printer. We
need our asset prices to continue going
up. We need our salary to continue going
up. And if anything threatens that and
the good old central bank steps in and
inflates away all the pain. So we have
the entire economy now built on an
inflationary foundation. One where the
money printer has to keep on going to
make the numbers go up. Otherwise it all
evaporates. It all collapses. However,
we have a new very strong deflationary
force that is rearing its head. AI. It
is technology just like all technology
before it that decreases the real cost
of wealth. So what happens when that
unstoppable deflationary force hits the
immovable inflationary wall? Well,
historically the answer is that
deflation always wins. When you look at
prices across thousands of years, the
inflationary fiat regimes always fail.
It just takes decades and sometimes even
centuries for it to play out. We read
about it in a couple of pages in a
history book, but it doesn't happen
quickly. Case in point, in 2020, they
expanded the US money supply by 25% in
one year. And there were a couple of
years of pretty high inflation, and
we're still feeling the effects of that.
But the dollar is still being used
globally, still being used domestically.
People are still denominating their debt
and their salaries in dollars. People
are still paying their taxes in dollars
and receiving payments for goods sold in
dollars. There's been no
hyperinflationary collapse, and we're 5
years in now. These things take much
longer to play out than most people
think. It is true that AI will bring
real growth and by growth I mean getting
more for less. It is also true that that
means prices of some things will go down
including wages for certain skills. It
is also true that that will result in
the end cost of those goods going down
because large profit margins that result
from that breed competition. If I can
get the business from the consumer by
decreasing my profit margin a little bit
and I will and it causes a race to the
bottom. Unfortunately, we also have the
inflationary government to deal with
because as people lose jobs and as
prices start to go down, those are two
things that the government doesn't want
to see. In fact, the government has told
the central bank that their two main
jobs are to make sure that people don't
lose their jobs. That's maximum
employment so that the government can
have a maximal tax base and stable
prices. In other words, make sure prices
continually increase. And so the world
in which we have people losing jobs and
the stuff that should have gone down in
price actually doesn't is one that the
government steps in with universal basic
income, stimulus checks in order to
offset the pain of those jobs going
away. But what that will really do is it
will keep the cost of everything from
going down. Now, if that's the way that
things do play out, then it does
accelerate the timeline of the dollar
not being used anymore. However, there
is kind of a thread the needle
possibility that I think a lot of people
are not considering that the government
inflates just enough to just mostly
offset the deflation. similar to what we
saw with the internet. Just like the
cost of TVs decreased insanely rapidly
over the last couple of decades, we
should have seen the same cost decrease
across the board with everything. But
the money printer fired up basically
just enough to prevent that from
happening. Sure, we got a few financial
crises along the way, but that only
resulted in a little bit of extra wealth
inequality. And it's my bet that they
will try to thread the needle in the
same way going forward into the future.
just slightly outprint the growth. Which
means that if you want to be able to win
this game no matter what happens, you
have to be prepared for both the
inflation and potential deflation. You
have to own assets that will increase in
real purchasing power no matter what.
You have to learn skills to increase
your income faster than you lose
purchasing power no matter what. There's
no world in which you can just learn one
skill and hope to ride that out for the
rest of your life. Because if you try to
do that, you will end up being a victim.
Prioritize increasing your income
radically every single year. Then make a
hard rule to never outspend your income.
Produce as much as you can. Consume as
little as you can. Take the difference.
Invest it in assets that will protect
you from both inflation and deflation.
By the way, to protect yourself from
deflation, you just have to make sure
that the income from that asset or the
growth from that asset is more than the
real cost of living, which means the
asset price still might drop. You just
need to make sure it doesn't drop more
than your cost of living goes down by.
And if that seems too hard or too
complicated, I mean, what is the
alternative? You can't control the way
that the world goes. You can't control
what other people do. You can't control
what technologies are being produced. We
can only study history and try and get a
good idea of what that means for the
future. That way we can be as prepared
as possible. As always, thank you so
much for watching.