Well, it looks like rate cuts might be
off the table, at least for now. That's
according to what the market is pricing
in for the next Fed meeting and even
throughout the rest of 2026. As a result
of the conflict and war breaking out
with Iran and continuing longer than
some people expected, bond market has
been falling apart. We've seen yields on
30-year Treasuries skyrocket last couple
of weeks, as well as the 20-year yields
and 10-year yields and especially
shorter-term yields like the 2-year,
1-year bills. Even though it is more
muted, we are still seeing that at
6-month as well. In case you're unaware,
bond prices and bond yields are
inversely correlated. So, when you see
interest rates and yields going up, that
means the prices of those bonds
themselves are going down. The market is
selling off these bonds. And that's
happening even though right now the US
Treasury is doing record-breaking
buybacks of their own Treasury bonds. In
one day, they bought back $4 billion
worth of Treasury bonds and just a
couple days before that, they bought
back $15 billion worth of their own
Treasury bonds. That's a total of $19
billion in one week and up to date, that
is a current record. However, that is
absolutely nothing. It is a drop in the
bucket compared to the overall Treasury
market, which is why you are seeing the
price of these bonds fall very quickly
with bond funds like the iShares 7 to
10-year Treasury Bond ETF, symbol IEF,
falling a total of 2 and 1/2% in just
the last couple of weeks. 2 and 1/2%
doesn't sound like a lot, but for bonds,
it is. And TLT, which is longer-term
bonds, is falling as well, down over 4%
in the exact same time frame. Now, it's
not just bond market movement that
predicts what the Federal Reserve is
going to do at their next meeting,
especially because for some of these
longer-term bonds, they're not as
influenced by what the Federal Reserve
is doing for the Fed funds rate, which
affects the overnight lending rate. And
that's where we have to look at the Fed
Watch Tool, which shows the odds that
traders are pricing in for the next
Federal Reserve meeting. And you can
see, there's about a 99%
probability being priced in right now
that the federal funds rate will not
change at the next meeting, that it will
stay right where it is. And on the other
hand, there's only a 1% less than 1%
chance that is being priced in that the
Federal Reserve will cut rates. And this
is an extremely reliable indicator.
Very, very rarely does the Federal
Reserve ever do anything that is
different than what the market is
pricing in unless there is an emergency.
Think 2020, financial crisis, repo
market blow up in 2019. It is extremely
rare that the Federal Reserve shocks or
surprises the markets. Almost always, it
just follows what's being priced in.
Now, that part that I just said there,
outside of an emergency, is actually
important here because of a couple of
things that the market is probably right
what it's pricing in for the next Fed
meeting, but it is probably wrong what
it's pricing in for the rest of the year
for a couple of reasons that I'll get
into in just a moment. You see, right
now, employment is kind of falling
apart. The unemployment rate rose to
4.4% unexpectedly. US payrolls fell by
92,000 in February. And over the last
year, prior payroll reports have all
been adjusted lower. Jobs growth has
essentially stalled. In fact, if you
take a look at this chart, which plots
job growth in the United States, you can
see the red dot, which indicates
Liberation Day shortly after Trump took
office in 2025, and the trend very
clearly changed from there, essentially
flatlining. Now, this is important
because we know employment is something
that the Federal Reserve watches very
carefully. We all know that the Federal
Reserve has the dual mandate of maximum
employment and stable prices. It's
actually a triple mandate. The third one
is moderate long-term interest rates.
We'll get to that in a moment. With
employment flatlining, payrolls falling
in February, unemployment rising, this
is basically a third of what the Federal
Reserve watches that to them is giving
them the push to lower rates. The second
thing they watch is obviously the
official inflation rates. And I say
rates because it's not just the CPI. But
we can take a look at the CPI because
they do watch the CPI and we can see
that in February, it was 2.43%.
It was a tad bit higher than January
2.39%,
but not much. And, it's about the exact
same place that inflation was all the
way back in September of 2024, when it
bottomed out at 2.42%. In other words,
the CPI has largely been moving sideways
for about a year and a half now. And,
other third-party measurements of
inflation are reporting even lower
levels of inflation right now.
Trueflation is showing 1.21%
year-over-year. And, earlier in
February, Trueflation's inflation
indicator bottomed out at only 0.6%
inflation year-over-year. So, if both
inflation and employment are in a place
where it looks like the Federal Reserve
would be leaning towards cutting rates,
why is the market now pricing that out
of the question? Well, it's because of
two main things right now, energy prices
skyrocketing and inflation fears popping
as result of the war in Iran. Oil
temporarily spiked all the way up to 115
before it collapsed all the way back
down to about 77. And, it has been
making its way higher now as of the time
of this recording around 94. Oil prices
going up influence pretty much
everything because to make anything in
this world, and then to transport it
anywhere where that thing needs to go,
you need oil. If you look around you,
the desk that is in front of you, the
chair that you're sitting on, the phone
in your pocket, the house or the office
that you're sitting in, the roof over
your head, the car that gets you to and
from work every day, and the electricity
that is powering everything that I just
described, none of that would be at all
possible without oil. So, when oil gets
more expensive, that is an input for the
rest of the global economy. So, that has
led traders to price in basically zero
chance of the Fed cutting rates at their
next meeting because if oil gets more
expensive and everything else does, that
means inflation is going to move higher,
which means the Federal Reserve doesn't
have room to cut rates. But, that's not
the whole story here, which is why I
said earlier that I don't think this is
going to mean what traders think it's
going to mean for the rest of the year.
Certainly at this next meeting, yes, but
not for the rest of the year, and here's
why. In a vacuum, all else being equal,
if nothing else takes place, oil itself
going up cannot cause overall inflation
to move up. Just like tariffs cannot
cause overall inflation to move up. If
you make one thing artificially more
expensive, whether it's through a new
tax or through a war, that cannot cause,
broadly speaking, all prices to go up.
And the reason why is because you don't
have more money in order to continue
paying those higher prices for some
things and continue demand across
everything else at the same prices. In
other words, if your electricity bill
goes up by, let's say, double, then for
most people that means you will have to
buy less other stuff. Maybe you go to
the movies less, maybe you buy less
food, maybe you go out to eat less,
maybe you shop on Amazon a little bit
less, maybe you don't go on that trip
you were planning on taking, but it
means that that increased spending in
one area takes away demand from other
areas. Maybe you have a little bit of
cushion in your budget, but you don't
have infinite cushion in your budget.
Just because one thing in your budget
gets way more expensive doesn't mean
your overall spending can stay elevated.
Your overall spending is probably going
to stay roughly the same, it just means
something else is going to get spent
less. Now, obviously, we don't live in a
world where all else is equal. We don't
live in a vacuum. We don't live in an
evenly rotating economy. That's not how
things work. And fundamentally, the
reason why prices have still been going
up, even since the money printing from
2020 and 2021 have stopped years ago, is
because the money supply is still
rising. Yes, we got a brief dip in the
money supply back in 2022 and 2023, but
it is since recovered and made new
all-time highs, and it is still rising.
The only way you can get sustainable
inflation across the entire basket of
goods in an economy is with more money
chasing those goods and services. And in
fact, you don't just need more money,
you need so much more money that the
money supply growth outpaces the supply
of goods and services growth. Because we
have economic growth and increase in
production, if the money supply didn't
change, things would actually get
cheaper over time. So, because we have a
growing production and an increasing
size of our economy, we need the money.
They not we.
>> [laughter]
>> We don't need the money supply to grow.
The policy makers want the money supply
to grow, not only just along pace with
that, but even more so so that prices
don't go down. They don't even stay
flat, prices go up. And the growing
money supply is the only way that you
get that, which means an oil shock by
itself will not cause a sustained spike
in the CPI or the PCE or any other
measure of inflation because it will
take demand from somewhere else cuz that
demand is largely inelastic. A lot of
that spending has to keep on happening,
which means spending in other places
will have to decrease. And as recently
as March 12th of 2026, which is the day
that I'm recording this video, President
Trump renewed his call again for the
Federal Reserve to cut interest rates.
He posted on Truth Social, "Where is
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome too late
Powell today? He should be dropping
interest rates immediately, not waiting
for the next meeting." This is in the
midst of oil nearing $100. This is in
the midst of the war still escalating or
continuing. And this is one of the
reasons why I don't think it is logical
to say, "Hey, rate cuts for the rest of
the year are just out especially as we
approach midterms, unemployment spiking,
payrolls dropping off a cliff, total CPI
numbers really not changing, and most
importantly, the cost of US government
debt financing increasing. We are going
to see the new Fed Chair Kevin Warsh
come in and do some things to fix these
problems. Yes, they will be Band-Aids.
Yes, they're are the solutions that will
cause prosperity for the nation
long-term, but they will address the
symptoms that the current policy makers
are facing right now. And they're going
to do that by lowering rates across the
curve. Not only is the Federal Reserve
going to cut the short-term interest
rates, the Fed funds rate, but also in
conjunction with the Treasury, they are
going to deregulate the banks so the
banks can go in and buy an unlimited
number of US Treasuries and explode
private lending. And the data that they
watch for their triple mandate, maximum
employment, stable prices, and moderate
long-term interest rates, the data that
they're looking at for those three
mandates will be there to support that
action. They're looking at the 10-year
yield skyrocketing, they're going to
say, "Hey, we need to get those interest
rates down to a place that is more
moderate." They're looking at inflation
largely staying the same even with the
oil shock and with the war in Iran,
they're going to say, "Hey, we have room
to cut interest rates." They're looking
at employment going down, unemployment
going up, and they're saying, "Hey, we
need to cut interest rates." So, it is
my opinion that this temporary repricing
of what the Federal Reserve is going to
do for the rest of this year is
misplaced. Their next meeting, sure,
Federal Reserve is probably not going to
cut rates. That's going to set the stage
for an even greater need for the Federal
Reserve to take even more drastic action
once new Fed chair Kevin Warsh gets in
place. As of right now, the stock market
is still above its 200-day moving
average, which is making this look very
much like a buy the dip opportunity. Of
course, staying disciplined with risk
management, whether that's tight stops,
hedging, or whatever you have in place.
As always, thank you guys so much for
watching. Have a great day.