United States of America is broke. And
no, I'm not talking about the people
here. The United States is still
obviously one of the wealthiest places
on Earth. I'm talking about the
government, because the United States
government is broke. It is bankrupt. It
is in more debt than it could ever
afford to repay. And it has no way to
make the payments on it other than
printing. Now, we got into this
situation because of decades of funding
endless wars, policing the entire world,
tearing down and setting up regimes, and
borrowing trillions of dollars to pay
for it. But, the government couldn't
borrow enough dollars that already
existed because there simply wasn't
enough money. And they couldn't tax it
directly from us to pay for it because
again, we didn't have enough money. So,
they printed it. They paid for it with
inflation. And now Americans are paying
the price at the gas pump, at the
grocery store, when they're house
hunting, or shopping for a new car. The
unaffordable cost of living is the price
of decades of endless wars. And that is
the real reason that the United States
just removed Maduro from power in
Venezuela. It's not about drugs. It's
not even really about oil. It is about
consolidating power where we can still
afford to do so, especially and most
importantly, in the places where we
can't afford to lose it. This is the new
global order. As I'm sure you are aware,
Venezuela is very, very rich in natural
resources. If you take a look at pretty
much any estimation of oil reserves by
country, Venezuela is usually at or near
the top. Now, some of this might be
skewed because this data is
self-reported, so it's unclear at this
time exactly how much oil Venezuela has.
But, it's not nothing. The thing is
though, Venezuela produces something
called heavy crude oil. And heavy crude
oil is a lot harder to refine. There are
not that many places on Earth that can
refine heavy oil. And most of the places
that can are in the United States. And
it's companies like Chevron and Exxon
Mobil and Valero that control or own
these refineries. And so, there are
definitely some US oil companies that
will be a beneficiary of this regime
change, even if there's no direct
involvement down in Venezuela. But
again, it's not about the oil. It's
about the other things that Venezuela is
rich in. Rare earth minerals. I highly
recommend checking out and subscribing
to renegaderesources.pro.
It is the Substack of Tracy Shuchart on
Twitter. And she just did a fantastic
write-up on the real natural resources
in Venezuela. And she points out that
the United States is 100% import reliant
for 12 critical minerals, and over 50%
reliant for 28 of the 50 minerals
classified as an essential to national
security. And that China controls
between 60 and 95% of global processing
capacity for most of these critical
minerals. And on top of that, they
possess 91% of rare earth elements
globally. But many of these can be found
in Venezuela. These are elements that
are absolutely necessary for military
technology. Not nice to have, need to
have. And over the last year, we've seen
China demonstrate a willingness to shut
off those supply chains to United
States, which is why the United States
has now looked at those and said, "We
need to secure and lock down as much of
this as we possibly can, because we
can't rely on getting it from China
anymore, cuz if they don't want to give
it to us, we might not be able to get it
from them." Now, part of the reason why
China may not be willing to give it to
us is because China is a direct
competitor in the global superpower
race. A race that the United States was
winning for a century. But that is not a
position that the US can financially
afford anymore. When you look at how
much money the United States government
is mandated to spend by law, as of 2024,
it was 4.1 trillion dollars. When you
add on top of that just the interest on
the national debt alone, you already
exceed total tax revenues, which means
if the United States government stopped
spending a single dollar on any of the
discretionary budget, anything outside
of Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security,
and the interest on the debt, it would
still be running a deficit. It would
still not be able to tax enough in order
to fund all of its expenses. This is why
the US House Budget Committee estimates
that within 30 years, the US will have
120 trillion dollars in unfunded
liabilities. 120
trillion dollars in unfunded
mandatory expenses. The United States
cannot afford to focus on, care about,
or spend money on the concerns of the
rest of the world. And if it tries to do
so, it will literally collapse. It will
fail. It will break. The United States
will be no more. Because history has
proven the more we intervene around the
world, the more we force our opinions,
set up and tear down regimes, fund
groups to topple dictators, and try and
control the entire globe, the more it
pushes back against us. Even if you just
take a look at the Middle East, you look
at the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, and ISIS,
these were either directly or indirectly
created by the United States
intervention in the region. And the same
thing is happening right now in China's
corner of the map. The conflict is
growing there. But China has not just
been staying on its side of the map. In
Venezuela specifically, it is very well
known that Iran, Russia, and China have
been extremely involved there. In fact,
they are the reasons why Maduro was even
in power in the first place, keeping
their dictator in power there so that
they would be beneficiaries of all of
the resources Venezuela had to offer.
And considering that those minerals that
Venezuela is rich in are necessary for
US military tech, and considering we
cannot rely on being able to get those
from China anymore, this was the next
chip that needed to fall for the US to
be able to maintain some of its power
globally. The US took out Maduro and is
now running Venezuela for the
foreseeable future. Now, in my opinion,
this is a signpost of what US hegemony
will look like in the 21st century. The
US, going forward, will be focusing on
the Western Hemisphere, control North
and South America, leave the rest of the
world to itself. In fact, many in the
Eastern Hemisphere are afraid of just
that. The era of America's security
guarantee for Europe is over. EU leaders
committing to work together after Trump
signals that Europe must defend itself.
Now, ironically, military actions like
the one we just did in Venezuela could
actually stave off or even prevent
larger conflicts or even all-out war
with countries like Russia or China.
It's a signal that basically says, "Hey,
you stay on your side, we'll stay on
ours." But regardless of what happens
from here, how many other dictators or
regimes get changed in South America, it
is clear that this century is not going
to look like the last. It is more
multipolar, a lot less globalization,
and maybe even deglobalization. A lot
more national interest in securing vital
resources, nationalizing resources,
governments taking stakes in the means
of private production. I mean, in
private companies, like a 10% ownership
stake in mineral or resource companies.
And what happened in Venezuela is likely
not a one-off event. Again, it does not
seem like this had anything to do with
drugs or even with oil. Those are really
good things for the broader news cycles
so that you can point to and say, "Hey,
these were the reasons we did this." But
this looks like a signpost pointing to
what the new world order will look like.
The US will continue to exercise what
power and strength it has left by
bringing it all closer to home where we
can afford it, in order to make sure
that we don't lose anything that we just
can't afford to lose. Now, this also
means if you are still investing like
it's the last century, and your
portfolio is still allocated based on
what worked over the past 40, 50, 60
years, it's likely that you are
unprepared for the new world order. If
you want help with that to make sure
you're not being left behind, go ahead
and sign up for my free newsletter
linked in the description below. As
always, thanks so much for watching.
Have a great day.